[Head note all pages: May 30, 1996, Prepublication Copy
Subject to Further Editorial Correction]


                              5

           Escrowed Encryption and Related Issues


   Chapter 5 describes a tool escrowed encryption -- that
responds to the needs described in Chapter 3 for exceptional
access to encrypted information. Escrowed encryption is the
basis for a number of Administration proposals that seek to
reconcile needs for information security against the needs of
law enforcement and to a lesser extent national security. As
in the case of export controls, escrowed encryption generates
considerable controversy.


              5.1 WHAT IS ESCROWED ENCRYPTION?


   The term "escrow," as used conventionally, implies that
some item of value (e.g., a trust deed, money, real property,
other physical object) is delivered to an independent trusted
party that might be a person or an organization (i.e., an
escrow agent) for safekeeping, and is accompanied by a set of
rules provided by the parties involved in the transaction
governing the actions of the escrow agent. Such rules
typically specify what is to be done with the item, the
schedule to be followed, and the list of other events that
have to occur. The underlying notion is that the escrow agent
is a secure haven for temporary ownership or possession of the
item, is legally bound to comply with the set of rules for its
disposition, functions as a disinterested extratransaction
party, and bears legal liability for malfeasance or mistakes.

   Usually, the rules stipulate that, all conditions set forth
in the escrow rules having been fulfilled, there will
eventually be delivery of the item to a specified party (e.g.,
possibly the original depositing party, an estate, a judicial
officer for custody, one or more individuals or
organizations). In any event, the salient point is that all
terms and conditions and functioning of an escrow process are,
or can be, visible to the parties involved; moreover, the
behavior and performance of formal escrow agents are governed
by legally established obligations.

   As it applies to cryptography, the term "escrow" was
introduced by the government's April 1993 Clipper initiative
in the context of encryption keys. Prior to this time, the
term "escrow" had not been widely associated with
cryptography, although the underlying concepts had been known
for some time (as described below). The Clipper initiative
promoting escrowed encryption was intended "to improve the
security and privacy of telephone communications while meeting
the legitimate needs of law enforcement."(1) In this original
context, the term "escrowed encryption" had a very specific
and narrow meaning: escrowed encryption was a mechanism that
would assure law enforcement access to the voice
communications underlying encrypted intercepts from wiretaps.

   However, during 3 years of public debate and dialogue,
"escrow," "key escrow," and "escrowed encryption" have become
terms with a much broader meaning. Indeed, many different
schemes for "escrowed encryption" are quite different from
"escrowed encryption" as the term was used in the Clipper
initiative.

   As is so often the case in computer-related matters,
terminology for escrowed systems is today not clearly
established and can be confusing or misleading. While new
terminology could be introduced in an effort to clarify
meaning, the fact is that the present policy and public and
technical dialogues all use "escrow" and "escrowed encryption"
in a very generic and broad sense. It is no longer the very
precise restricted concept embodied in the Clipper initiative
and described in Section 5.2.1. Escrow as a concept now
applies not only to the initial purpose of assuring law
enforcement access to encrypted materials, but also to
possible end-user or organizational requirements for a
mechanism to protect against lost, corrupted, or unavailable
keys. It can also mean that some process such as authority to
decrypt a header containing a session key is escrowed with a
trusted party, or it can mean that a corporation is ready to
cooperate with law enforcement to access encrypted materials.

   This report conforms to current usage, considering escrowed
encryption as a broad concept that can be implemented in many
ways; Section 5.3 addresses forms of escrowed encryption other
than that described in the Clipper initiative. Also, escrowed
encryption is only one of several approaches to providing
exceptional access to encrypted information; nonescrow
approaches to providing exceptional access are discussed in
Chapter 7.2.

   Finally, the relationship between "strong encryption" and
"escrowed encryption" should be noted. As stated above,
escrowed encryption refers to an approach to encryption that
enables exceptional access to plaintext without requiring a
third party (e.g., government acting with legal authorization,
a corporation acting in accordance with its contractual rights
vis-a-vis its employees, an individual who has lost an
encryption key) to perform a cryptanalytic attack. At the same
time, escrowed encryption can involve cryptographic algorithms
that are strong or weak and keys that are long or short. Some
participants in the public debate appear to believe that
escrowed encryption is necessarily equivalent to weak
encryption, because it does not prevent third parties from
having access to the relevant plaintext. But this is a
mischaracterization of the intent behind escrowed encryption,
since all escrowed encryption schemes proposed to date are
intended to provide very strong cryptographic confidentiality
(strong algorithms, relatively long keys) for users against
unauthorized third parties, but no confidentiality at all
against third parties who have authorized exceptional access.

----------

   (1)  See Statement by the Press Secretary, The White House,
April 16, 1993. Reprinted in David Banisar (ed.). 1994.
"Statement by the Press Secretary, The White House, April 16,
1993," *1994 Cryptography and Privacy Sourcebook*, Electronic
Privacy Information Center, Diane Publishing, Upland,
Pennsylvania, Part II. The name "Clipper" initially selected
as the name of this effort proved later to be a trademark
whose holder relinquished it to public use.

   (2)  In the more general meaning of escrowed encryption,
exceptional access refers to access to plaintext by a party
other than the originator and the recipient of encrypted
communications. For the case of stored information,
exceptional access may refer to access to the plaintext of an
encrypted file by someone not designated by the original
encryptor of the file to decrypt it or even by persons so
designated who have forgotten how to do so. See also Chapter
3.

   Contrast the meaning of third-party access in the original
Clipper context, in which third-party access refers to assured
access, under proper court authorization, by law enforcement
to the plaintext of an encrypted voice conversation. The
Clipper initiative was intended to support a system that
provided a technically convenient means to assure fulfillment
of such a requirement. Note that this meaning is much narrower
than the use of the more general term "exceptional access"
described in the previous paragraph.

____________________________________________________________


               5.2 ADMINISTRATION INITIATIVES
               SUPPORTING ESCROWED ENCRYPTION


   Since inheriting the problem of providing law enforcement
access to encrypted telephony from the outgoing Bush
Administration in late 1992, Clinton Administration officials
have said that as they considered the not-so-distant future of
information technology and information security along with the
stated needs of law enforcement and national security for
access to information, they saw three alternatives.(3)

   +    To do nothing, resulting in the possible proliferation
of products with encryption capabilities that would seriously
weaken, if not wholly negate, the authority to wiretap
embodied in the Wiretap Act of 1968 (Title III) and damage
intelligence collection for national security and foreign
policy reasons;

   +    To support an approach based on weak encryption,
likely resulting in poor security and cryptographic
confidentiality for important personal and business
information; and

   +    To support an approach based on strong but escrowed
encryption. If widely adopted and properly implemented,
escrowed encryption could provide legitimate users with high
degrees of assurance that their sensitive information would
remain secure but nevertheless enable law enforcement and
national security authorities to obtain access to
escrow-encrypted data in specific instances when authorized
under law. Moreover, the Administration hoped that by meeting
legitimate demands for better information security, escrowed
encryption would dampen the market for unescrowed encryption
products that would deny access to law enforcement and
national security authorities even when they sought access for
legitimate and lawfully authorized purposes.

   The Administration chose the last, and since April 1993,
the U.S. government has advanced a number of initiatives to
support the insertion of key escrow features into products
with encryption capabilities that will become available in the
future. These include the Clipper initiative and the Escrowed
Encryption Standard, the Capstone/Fortezza initiative, and the
proposal to liberalize export controls on products using
escrowed encryption. These initiatives raise a number of
important issues that are the focus of Sections 5.3 to 5.13.

-----------

   (3)  See, for example, statement of Raymond Kammer, deputy
director, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
before the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, May 3,
1994. Available on line from
http://www.nist.gov/item/testimony/may94/encryp.html.

____________________________________________________________


              5.2.1 The Clipper Initiative and
              the Escrowed Encryption Standard

   As noted above, the Clipper initiative was conceived as a
way for providing legal access by law enforcement authorities
to encrypted telephony.(4) The Escrowed Encryption Standard
(EES; a Federal Information Processing Standard, FIPS-185) was
promulgated in February 1994 as the key technological
component of the Clipper initiative (Box 5.1). Specifically,
the EES called for the integration of special microeleckonic
integrated circuit chips (called "Clipper chips") into devices
used for voice communications, these chips, as one part of an
overall system, provide voice confidentiality for the user and
exceptional access to law enforcement authorities. To provide
these functions, the Clipper chip was designed with a number
of essential characteristics:

   +    Confidentiality would be provided by a classified
algorithm known as Skipjack. Using an 80-bit key, the Skipjack
algorithm would offer considerably more protection against
brute-force attacks than the 56-bit DES algorithm (FIPS 46-1).
The Skipjack algorithm was reviewed by several independent
experts, all with the necessary security clearances. In the
course of an investigation limited by time and resources, they
reported that they did not find short-cuts that would
significantly reduce the time to perform a cryptanalytic
attack below what would be required by brute force.(5)

   +    The chip would be protected against reverse
engineering and other attempts to access its technical
details.

   +    The chip would be factory-programmed with a
chip-unique secret key, the "unit key" or "device key,"(6) at
the time of fabrication. Possession of this key would enable
one to decrypt all communications sent to and from the
telephone unit in which the chip was integrated.

   +    A law enforcement access field (LEAF) would be a
required part of every transmission and would be generated by
the chip. The LEAF would contain two items: (a) the current
session key,(7) encrypted with a combination of the
device-unique unit key, and (b) the chip serial number. The
entire LEAF would itself be encrypted by a different but
secret "family key" also permanently embedded in the chip. The
family key would be the same in all Clipper chips produced by
a given manufacturer; in practice, all Clipper chips
regardless of manufacturer are programmed today by the
Mykotronx Corporation with the same family key.

   To manage the use of the LEAF, the U.S. government would
undertake a number of actions:

   +    The unit key, known at the time of manufacture and
unchangeable for the life of chip, would be divided into two
components, each of which would be deposited with and held
under high security by two trusted government escrow agents
located within the Departments of Commerce and Treasury.

   +    These escrow agents would serve as repositories for
all such materials, releasing the relevant information to law
enforcement authorities upon presentation of the unit
identification and lawfully obtained court orders.

   When law enforcement officials encountered a Clipper-
encrypted conversation on a wiretap, they would use the LEAF
to obtain the serial number of the Clipper chip performing the
encryption and the encrypted session key.(8) Upon presentation
of the serial number and court authorization for the wiretap
to the escrow agents, law enforcement officials could then
obtain the proper unit-key components, combine them, recover
the session key, and eventually decrypt the encrypted voice
communications.(9) Only one key would be required in order to
obtain access to both sides of the Clipper-encrypted
conversation. The authority for law enforcement to approach
escrow agents and request unit-key components was considered
to be that granted by Title III and the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act (FISA).(10)

   As a FIPS, the EES is intended for use by the federal
government and has no legal standing outside the federal
government. Indeed, its use is optional even by federal
agencies. In other words, federal agencies with a requirement
for secure voice communications have a choice about whether or
not to adopt the EES for their own purposes. More importantly,
the use of EES-compliant devices by private parties cannot in
general be compelled by executive action alone; private
consumers are free to decide whether or not to use
EES-compliant devices to safeguard communications and are free
to use other approaches to communications security should they
so desire." However, if consumers choose to use EES-compliant
devices, they must accept key escrow as outlined in procedures
promulgated by the government. This characteristic -- that
interoperability requires acceptance of key escrow -- is a
design choice; a different specification could permit the
interoperability of devices with or without features for key
escrow.

   The EES was developed by communications security experts
from the National Security Agency (NSA), but the escrow
features of the EES are intended to meet the needs of law
enforcement -- i.e., its needs for clandestine surveillance of
electronic and wire communications as described in Chapter 3.
NSA played this development role because of its technical
expertise. EES-compliant devices are also approved for
communicating classified information up to and including
SECRET. In speaking with the committee, Administration
officials described the Clipper initiative as more or less
irrelevant to the needs of signals intelligence (SIGINT) (Box
5.2).

   As of early 1996, AT&T has sold about 10,000 to 15,000
units of the Surity Telephone Device 3600. These include four
configurations: Model C, containing only the Clipper chip,
which has been purchased primarily by U.S. government
customers; Model F, containing only an AT&T-proprietary
algorithm that is exportable; Model P, containing an
AT&T-proprietary nonexportable algorithm in addition to the
exportable algorithm; and Model S, with all three of the
above. Only units with the Clipper chip have a key-escrow
feature. All the telephones are interoperable -- they
negotiate with each other to settle on a mutually available
algorithm at the beginning of a call.(12) In addition, AT&T
and Cycomm International have agreed to jointly develop and
market Clipper-compatible digital voice encryption attachments
for Motorola's Micro-Tac series of handheld cellular
telephones; these products are expected to be available in the
second quarter of 1996.(13) Finally, AT&T makes no particular
secret of the fact that its Surity line of secure voice
communication products employs Clipper chip technology, but
that fact is not featured in the product literature; potential
consumers would have to know enough to ask a knowledgeable
sales representative.

----------

   (4)  Dorothy Denning and Miles Smid, "Key Escrowing Today,"
*IEEE Communications*, Volume 32, 1994, pp. 58-68. Available
on-line from http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/
crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.

   (5)  See Ernest Brickell et al., *SKIPJACK Review: Interim
Report*, July 28, 1993. Posted to the "sci.crypt" newsgroup on
August 1, 1993, by Dorothy Denning and available from
http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/SKIPJACK.txt.
Reprinted in Lance Hoffman (ed.), *Building in Big Brother:
The Cryptographic Policy Debate*, Springer-Verlag, New York,
1995, pp. 119-130.

   (6)  The device key or unit key is used to open the
encryption that protects a session key. Hence, possession of
the unit key allows the decryption of all messages or files
encrypted with that unit or device. "Session key" is defined
in footnote 7.

   (7)  "Session," as in computer science, denotes a period of
time during which one or more computer-based processes are
operational and performing some function; typically two or
more of systems, end users, or software processes are involved
in a session. It is analogous to a meeting among these things.
For cryptography, a session is the plaintext data stream on
which the cryptographic process operates. The session key is
the actual key that is needed to decrypt the resulting
ciphertext. In the context of an encrypted data transmission
or telephone call, the session key is the key needed to
decrypt the communications stream. For encrypted data storage,
it is the key needed to decrypt the file. Note that in the
case of symmetric encryption (discussed in Chapter 2), the
decryption key is identical to the encryption key. Since
asymmetric encryption for confidentiality is efficient only
for short messages or files, symmetric encryption is used for
session encryption of telephony, data transmissions, and data
storage.

   (8)  Because the family key would be known to law
enforcement officials, obtaining the unencrypted LEAF would
present no problems.

   (9)  Questions have arisen about NSA access to escrowed
keys. NSA has stated for the record to the committee that "key
escrow does not affect either the authorities or restrictions
applicable to NSA's signals intelligence activities. NSA's
access to escrowed keys will be tied to collection against
legitimate foreign intelligence targets. The key holder must
have some assurance that NSA is involved in an authorized
intelligence collection activity and that the collection
activity will be conducted in accordance with the appropriate
restrictions." For a description of these restrictions, see
Appendix D of this report.

   (10) Dorothy Denning and Miles Smid, "Key Escrowing Today,"
*IEEE Communications*, Volume 32, 1994, pp. 58-68. Available
on-line from http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/
crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.

   Given its initial intent to preserve law enforcement's
ability to conduct wire taps, it follows that Clipper key
escrow would be conducted without the knowledge of parties
whose keys had been escrowed, and would be conducted by a set
of rules that would be publicly known but not changeable by
the affected parties. Under the requirements of Title III, the
affected parties would be notified of the tapping activity at
its conclusion, unless the information were to become the
basis for a criminal indictment or an ongoing investigation.
In the latter case, the accused would learn of the wiretaps,
and hence the law enforcement use of escrowed keys, through
court procedures.

   (11) For example, an opinion issued by the Congressional
Research Service argues that legislation would be required to
mandate the use of the Clipper chip beyond Federal computer
systems. Memorandum from the American Law Division,
Congressional Research Service, *Current Legal Authority to
Mandate Adoption of "Clipper Chip" Standards By Private
Parties*, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., October 4,
1994.

   (12) AT&T Secure Communications product literature,
available on-line from http://www.att.com/press/0694/
940613.pdb.html, and personal communication with Bruce Bailey,
AT&T Secure Communications Systems, Greensboro, N.C., March
29, 1996.

   (13) AT&T News Release, "AT&T, Cycomm International Develop
Digital Voice Encryption," November 1, 1995. Available on-line
from http://www.att.com/press/1195/951101.mma.html.

____________________________________________________________


         5.2.2 The Capstone/Fortezza Initiative(14)

   The Capstone/Forteza effort supports escrowed encryption
for data storage and communications, although a FIPS for this
application has not been issued. Specifically, the Capstone
chip is an integrated-circuit chip that provides a number of
encryption services for both stored computer data and data
communications. For confidentiality, the Capstone chip uses
the Skipjack algorithm, the same algorithm that is used in the
Clipper chip (which is intended only for voice communications,
including low-speed data and fax transmission across the
public switched telephone network, and the same mechanism to
provide for key escrowing. The agents used to hold Capstone
keys are also identical to those for holding Clipper keys --
namely the Departments of Treasury and Commerce. In addition,
the Capstone chip (in contrast to the Clipper chip) provides
services that conform to the Digital Signature Standard
(FIPS-186) to provide digital signatures that authenticate
user identity and the Secure Hash Standard (FIPS-180); the
chip also implements a classified algorithm for key exchange
(usually referred to as the Key Exchange Algorithm (KEA)) and
a random number generator.

   The Capstone chip is the heart of the Forteza card.(15) The
Fortezza card is a PC-card (formerly known as a PCMCIA card)
intended to be plugged into any computer with a PC-card
expansion slot and appropriate support software; with the card
in place, the host computer is able to provide reliable user
authentication and encryption for confidentiality and certify
data-kansmission integrity in any communication with any other
computer so equipped. The Fortezza card is an example of a
hardware token that can be used to ensure proper
authentication.(16) Note also that there are other hardware PC
cards that provide cryptographic functionality similar to that
of Forteza but without the escrow features.(17)

   To date, the NSA has issued two major solicitations for
Fortezza cards, the second of which was for 750,000 cards.(18)
These cards will be used by those on the Defense Messaging
System, a communications network that is expected to
accommodate up to 2 million Defense Department users in 2005.
In addition, Fortezza cards are intended to be available for
private sector use. The extent to which Fortezza cards will be
acceptable in the commercial market remains to be seen,
although a number of product vendors have decided to
incorporate support for Fortezza cards in some products.(19)

----------

   (14) Technically speaking, Clipper and Capstone/Fortezza
are not separate initiatives. The Capstone program had been
under way for a number of years prior to the public
announcement of the Clipper chip in 1993, and the Clipper chip
is based entirely on technology developed under the Capstone
program. The Clipper chip was developed when the incoming
Clinton Administration felt it had to address the problem of
voice encryption. However, while Clipper and Capstone/Fortezza
are not technically separate programs, the public debate has
engaged Clipper to a much greater degree than it has Capstone.
For this reason, this report discusses Clipper and
Capstone/Fortezza separately.

   (15) The Fortezza card was previously named the Tessera
card; the name was changed when previous trademark claims on
"Tessera" were discovered.

   (16) To ensure that the holder of the Fortezza card is in
fact the authorized holder, a personal identification number
(PIN) is associated with the card: only when the proper PIN is
entered will the Fortezza card activate its various functions.
While concerns have been raised in the security literature
that passwords and PINs are not secure when transmitted over
open communications lines, the PIN used by the Fortezza card
is never used outside of the confines of the user's system.
That is, the PIN is never transmitted over any network link;
the sole function of the PIN is to turn on the Fortezza card,
after which an automated protocol ensures secure
authentication.

   (17) For example, such devices are made by Cylink and
Telequip. See *Government Computer News*, "Security Device is
007 in Your Pocket," August 7, 1995, p. 6.

   (18) Paul Constance, "DoD Plans to Install 750,000 Fortezza
Cards," *Government Computer News*, July 31, 1995, p. 1 for
the solicitation.

   (19) For example, the Netscape Communications Corporation
has announced that it will support Fortezza in the next
version of its Web browser, while the Oracle Corporation will
support Fortezza in the next version of its Secure Network
Services product. See Elizabeth Sikorovsky, "Netscape and
Oracle Products Support Fortezza Card," *Federal Computer
Week*, October 23, 1995, p. 36.

____________________________________________________________


         5.2.3 The Relaxation of Export Controls on
         Software Products Using "Properly Escrowed"
                      64-bit Encryption

   As noted in Chapter 4, the Administration has proposed to
treat software products using a 64-bit encryption key as it
currently treats products with encryption capabilities that
are based on a 40-bit RC2 or RC4 algorithm, providing that
products using this stronger encryption are "properly
escrowed." This change is intended to facilitate the global
sale of U.S. software products with significantly stronger
cryptographic protection than is available from U.S. products
sold abroad today.

   To work out the details of what is meant by "properly
escrowed," the National Institute of Standards and Technology
held workshops in September and December 1995 at which the
Administration released a number of draft criteria for export
control (Box 5.3). These criteria are intended to ensure that
a product's key escrow mechanism cannot be readily altered or
bypassed so as to defeat the purposes of key escrowing. The
Administration has expressed its intent to move forward
rapidly with its proposal and seeks to finalize export
criteria and make formal conforming modifications to the
export regulations "soon" (at the time of this writing by
early 1996).


   5.2.4 Other Federal Initiatives in Escrowed Encryption

   In addition to the initiatives described above, the
Administration has announced plans for new Federal Information
Processing Standards in two other areas:

   +    FIPS-185 will be modified to include escrowed
encryption for data in both communicated and stored forms. The
modified FIPS is expected in late 1996; how this modification
will relate to Capstone/Fortezza is as yet uncertain.

   +    A FIPS for key escrow will be developed that will,
among other things, specify performance requirements for
escrow agents and for escrowed encryption products. How this
relates to the existing or modified FIPS-185 is also uncertain
at this time.



         5.3 OTHER APPROACHES TO ESCROWED ENCRYPTION


   A general concept akin to escrowed encryption has long been
familiar to some institutions, notably banks, that have for
years purchased information systems allowing them to retrieve
the plaintext of encrypted files or other stored information
long after the immediate need for such information has
passed.(20) However, only since the initial announcement of
the Clipper initiative in April 1993 has escrowed encryption
gained prominence in the public debate.

   Denning and Branstad describe a number of different
approaches to implementing an escrowed encryption scheme, all
of which have been discussed publicly since 1993.(21) Those
and other different approaches vary along the dimensions
discussed below:

   +    Number of escrow agents required to provide
exceptional access. For example, one proposal called for
separation of Clipper unit keys into more than two
components.(22) A second proposal called for the k-of-n
arrangement described in Section 5.9.1.

   +    Affiliation of escrow agents. Among the possibilities
are government in the executive branch, government in the
judicial brarlch, commercial institutions, product
manufacturers, and customers.

   +    Ability of parties to obtain exceptional access. Under
the Clipper initiative, the key-escrowing feature of the EES
is available only to law enforcement authorities acting under
court order; users never have access to the keys.

   +    Authorities vested in escrow agents. In the usual
discussion, escrow agents hold keys or components of keys. But
in one proposal, escrow agents known as Data Recovery Centers
(DRCs) do not hold user keys or user key components at all.
Products escrowed with a DRC would include in the ciphertext
of a transmission or a file the relevant session key encrypted
with the public key of that DRC and the identity of the DRC in
plaintext. Upon presentation of an appropriate request (e.g.,
valid court order for law enforcement authorities, a valid
request by the user of the DRC-escrowed product), the DRC
would retrieve the encrypted session key, decrypt it, and give
the original session key to the authorized third party, who
could then recover the data encrypted with that key.(23)

   +    Hardware vs. software implementation of products.

   +    Partial key escrow.(24) Under a partial key escrow, a
product with encryption capabilities could use keys of any
length, except that all but a certain number of bits would be
escrowed. For example, a key might be 256 bits long, and 216
bits (256 - 40) of the key would be escrowed, 40 bits would
remain private. Thus, decrypting ciphertext produced by this
product would require a 256-bit work factor for those without
the escrowed bits, and a 40-bit work factor for those
individuals in possession of the escrowed bits. Depending on
the number of private bits used, this approach would protect
users against disclosure of keys to those without access to
the specialized decryption facilities required to conduct an
exhaustive search against the private key (in this case, 40
bits).

   Box 5.4 describes a number of other conceptial approaches
to escrowed encryption.

----------

   (20) An example first announced in 1994 is Northern
Telecom's "Entrust," which provides for file encryption and
digital signature in a corporate network environment using RSA
public-key cryptography. "Entrust" allows master access by a
network administrator to all users' encrypted files, even
after a user has left the company. A product review for a
recent version of "Entrust" can be found in Stephen Cobb,
"Encryption for the Enterprise," *Network World*, March 11,
1996, p. 57.

   (21) All of these examples are taken from Dorothy Denning
and Dennis Branstad, "A Taxonomy of Key Escrow Encryption,"
*Communications of the ACM*, Volume 39, March, 1996.

   (22) This comment was probably made during the meetings of
July, August, and September, 1993 by the Computer System
Security and Privacy Advisory Board to solicit public views on
the Clipper initiative. Transcripts of the meetings are
available from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology.

   (23) Stephen T. Walker et al., *Commercial Key Escrow:
Something for Everyone Now and for the Future*, Report #541,
Trusted Information Systems, Glenwood, Md., January, 1995.

   (24) Adi Shamir, "Partial Key Escrow: A New Approach to
Software Key Escrow," summary of presentation at NIST FIPS Key
Escrow Workshop, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Gaithersburg, Md., September 15, 1995. Available
on-line at http://reality.sgi.com/employees/chrisr_corp/
pkedc.html.

____________________________________________________________


            5.4 THE IMPACT OF ESCROWED ENCRYPTION
                   ON INFORMATION SECURITY


   In the debate over escrowed encryption, the dimension of
information security that has received the largest amount of
public attention has been confidentiality. Judgments about the
impact of escrowed encryption on confidentiality depend on the
point of comparison. If the point of comparison is taken to be
the confidentiality of data available today, then the wide use
of escrowed encryption does improve confidentiality. The
reason is that most information today is entirely unprotected.

   Consider first information in transit (communications).
Most communications today are unencrypted. For example,
telephonic communications can be tapped in many different
ways, including through alligator clips at a junction box in
the basement of an apartment house or on top of a telephone
pole, off the air when some part of a telephonic link is
wireless (e.g., in a cellular call), and from the central
switching office that is carrying the call. Calls made using
EES-compliant telephones would be protected against such
surveillance, except when surveillance parties (presumably law
enforcement authorities) had obtained the necessary keys from
escrow agents. As for information in storage, most files on
most computers are unencrypted. Escrowed encryption applied to
these files would protect them against threats such as casual
snoops, although individuals with knowledge of the
vulnerabilities of the system on which those files reside
might still be able to access them.

   On the other hand, if the point of comparison is taken to
be the level of confidentiality that could be possible using
unescrowed encryption, then escrowed encryption offers a lower
degree of confidentiality. Escrowed encryption by design
introduces a system weakness (i.e., it is deliberately
designed to allow exceptional access), and so if the
procedures that protect against improper use of that access
somehow fail, information is left unprotected.(25) For
example, EES-compliant telephones would offer less
confidentiality for telephonic communications than would
telephones that could be available with the same encryption
algorithm and implementation but without the escrow feature,
since such telephones could be designed to provide
communications confidentiality against all eavesdroppers,
including rogue police, private investigators, or (and this is
the important point) legally authorized law enforcement
officials.

   More generally, escrowed encryption weakens the
confidentiality provided by an encryption system by providing
an access path that can be compromised.(26) Yet escrowed
encryption also provides a hedge against the loss of access to
encrypted data by those authorized for access; for example, a
user may lose or forget a decryption key. Assurances that
encrypted data will be available when needed are clearly
greater when a mechanism has been installed to facilitate such
access. Reasonable people may disagree about how to make that
trade-off in any particular case, thus underscoring the need
for end users themselves to make their own risk-benefit
assessments regarding the loss of authorized access (against
which escrowed encryption can protect by guaranteeing key
recovery) vs. the loss of confidentiality to unauthorized
parties (whose likelihood is increased by the use of escrowed
encryption).

   A point more specifically related to EES is that escrowed
encryption can also be used to enhance certain dimensions of
Title III protection. For example, the final procedures for
managing law enforcement access to EES-protected voice
conversations call for the hardware providing exceptional
access to be designed in such a way that law enforcement
officials would decrypt communications only if the
communications were occurring during the time window specified
in the initial court authorization. The fact that law
enforcement officials will have to approach escrow agents to
obtain the relevant key means that there will be an audit
trail for wiretaps requiring decryption, thus deterring
officials who might be tempted or able to act on their own in
obtaining a wiretap without legal authorization.

----------

   (25) Even worse, it is not just future communications that
are placed at risk, but past communications as well. For
example, if encrypted conversations are recorded and the
relevant key is not available, they are useless. However, once
the unit key is obtained, those recordings become decipherable
if they are still available. Such recording would be illegal,
because legal authorization for the wiretap would have been
necessary to obtain the key, but since these circumstances
presume a breakdown of escrow procedures in the first place,
the fact of illegality is not particularly relevant.

____________________________________________________________


            5.5 THE IMPACT OF ESCROWED ENCRYPTION
                     ON LAW ENFORCEMENT


   Box 5.5 describes the requirements for escrowed encryption
that law enforcement authorities (principally the FBI) would
like product vendors to accommodate. But two additional
high-level questions must be addressed before escrowed
encryption is accepted as an appropriate solution to the
stated law enforcement problem.


     5.5.1 Balance of Crime Enabled vs. Crime Prosecuted

   One question is the following: Does the benefit to law
enforcement from access to encrypted information through an
escrow mechanism outweigh the damage that might occur due to
the failure of procedures intended to prevent unauthorized
access to the escrow mechanism? Since government authorities
believe that the implementation of these procedures can be
made robust (and thus the anticipated expectation of failure
is slight), they answer the question in the affirmative.
Critics of government initiatives promoting escrowed
encryption raise the concern that the risk of failure may be
quite large, and thus their answer to the question ranges from
"maybe" to "strongly negative." These parties generally prefer
to rely on technologies and procedures that they fully
understand and control to maintain the security of their
information, and at best, they believe that any escrow
procedures create a potentially serious risk of misuse that
must be stringently counteracted, diligently monitored, and
legally constrained. Moreover, they believe that reliance on
government-established procedures to maintain proper access
controls on escrowed keys invites unauthorized third parties
to target those responsible for upholding the integrity of the
escrow system.

   History suggests that procedural risks materialize as real
problems over the long run,(27) but in practice, a base of
operational experience is necessary to determine if these
risks are significant.

__________

   (26) For example, if a party external to the corporation
has the keys that provide access to that corporation's
encrypted information, the corporation is more vulnerable to
a loss of confidentiality, because the external party can
become the target of theft, extortion, blackmail, and the like
by unauthorized parties who are seeking that information. Of
course, the corporation itself is vulnerable, but since only
one target (either the corporation or any external key-holding
party) needs to be compromised, more targets lead to greater
vulnerability. Of course, if keys are split among a number of
external parties, the likelihood of compromise through this
route is reduced, but the overall risk of compromise is still
increased.

   (27) See, for example, Peter Neumann, *Computer-Related
Risks*, Addison Wesley, New York, 1995; and Charles Perrow,
*Normal Accidents: Living With High-Risk Technologies*, Basic
Books, New York, 1984. Neumann describes a large number of
computer-related reliability and safety problems and security
vulnerabilities that have arisen from combinations of
defective system implementation, flawed system design, and
human error in executing procedures. Perrow describes a number
of accidents that have occurred in other domains (e.g.,
maritime shipping, air traffic control, nuclear power plant
operation) that have resulted from a similar set of problems.

____________________________________________________________


    5.5.2 Impact on Law Enforcement Access to Information

   Even if escrowed encryption were to achieve significant
market penetration and were widely deployed, the question
would still remain regarding the likely effectiveness of a law
enforcement strategy to preserve wiretapping and data recovery
capabilities through deployments of escrowed encryption built
around voluntary use.(28) This question has surfaced most
strongly in the debate over EES, but as with other aspects of
the cryptography debate, the answer depends on the scenario in
question:

   +    Many criminals will reach first for devices and tools
that are readily at hand because they are so much more
convenient to use than those that require special efforts to
obtain. Criminals who have relatively simple and
straightforward needs for secure communications may well use
EES-compliant devices if they are widely available. In such
cases, they will simply have forgotten (or not taken
sufficient conscious account of) the fact that these "secure"
devices have features that provide law enforcement access,(29)
and law enforcement officials will obtain the same level and
quality of information they currently obtain from legal
wiretaps. Indeed, the level and quality of information might
be even greater than what is available today because criminals
speaking on EES-compliant devices might well have a false
sense of security that they could not be wiretapped.

   +    Criminals whose judgment suggests the need for extra
and nonroutine security are likely to use secure
communications devices without features for exceptional
access. In these cases, law enforcement officials may be
denied important information. However, the use of these
communications devices is likely to be an ad hoc arrangement
among participants in the criminal activity. Since many
criminal activities often require participants to communicate
with people outside the immediate circle of participants,
"secondary" wiretap information might be available if
nonsecure devices were used to communicate with others not
directly associated with the activity.

   Senior Administration officials have recognized that the
latter scenario is inevitable -- it is impossible to prevent
all uses of strong unescrowed encryption by criminals and
terrorists. However, the widespread deployment of strong
encryption without features for exceptional access would mean
that even the careless criminal would easily obtain
unbreakable encryption, and thus the Administration's
initiatives are directed primarily at the first scenario.

   Similar considerations would apply to escrowed encryption
products used to store data -- many criminals will use
products with encryption capabilities that are easily
available to store files and send e-mail. If these products
are escrowed, law enforcement officials have a higher
likelihood of having access to those criminal data files and
e-mail. On the other hand, some criminals will hide or conceal
their stored data through the use of unescrowed products or by
storing them on remote computers whose location is known only
to them, with the result that the efforts of law enforcement
authorities to obtain information will he frustrated.
----------

   (28) "Voluntary" has been used ambiguously in the public
debate on key escrow. It can mean voluntary use of key escrow
in any context or implementation, or it can mean voluntary use
of EES-compliant products. In the latter situation, of course,
the key-escrow feature would be automatic. Usually, the
context of its use will clarify which interpretation
of"voluntary" is intended.

   (29) Cf. point in Chapter 2 regarding behavior of criminals
with respect to wiretapped telephone calls.

____________________________________________________________


             5.6 MANDATORY VS. VOLUNTARY USE OF
                     ESCROWED ENCRYPTION


   As noted above, the federal government cannot compel the
private sector to use escrowed encryption in the absence of
legislation, whether for voice communications or any other
application. However, EES raised the very important public
concern that the use of encryption without features for
exceptional access might be banned by statute. The
Administration has stated that it has no intention of
outlawing the use of such cryptography or of regulating in any
other way the domestic use of cryptography. Nevertheless, no
administration can bind future administrations, and Congress
can change a law at any time. More importantly, widespread
acceptance of escrowed encryption, even if voluntary, would
put into place an infrastructure that would support such a
policy change. Thus, the possibility that a future
administration and/or Congress might support prohibitions on
unescrowed encryption cannot be dismissed. This topic is
discussed in depth in Chapter 7.

   With respect to the federal government's assertion of
authority in the use of the EES by private parties, there are
a number of gray areas. For example, a federal agency that has
adopted the EES for secure telephonic communications clearly
has the right to require all contractors that interact with it
to use EES-compliant devices as a condition of doing business
with the government;(30, 31) this point is explored further in
Chapter 6. More problematic is the question of whether an
agency that interacts with the public at large without a
contractual arrangement may require such use.

   A second important gray area relates to the establishment
of EES as a de facto standard for use in the private sector
through mechanisms described in Chapter 6. In this area,
Administration officials have expressed to the committee a
hope that such would be the case. If EES-compliant devices
were to become very popular, they might well drive potential
competitors (specifically, devices for secure telephonic
communications without features for exceptional access) out of
the market for reasons of cost and scarcity. Under such
circumstances, it is not clear that initially voluntary use of
the EES would in the end leave room for a genuine choice for
consumers.

-----------

   (30) For example, at present the Department of Defense
requires that contractors acquire and employ STU-III secure
telephones for certain sensitive telephonic communication with
DOD personnel. The Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) were
modified to allow the costs of such telephones to be charged
against contracts, to further encourage purchase of these
telephones.

   (31) One major manufacturer noted to the committee that
meeting federal requirements for encryption also reduces its
ability to standardize on a single solution in distributed
networks. Government-mandated key escrow could differ
substantially enough from key escrow systems required for
commercial operations that two separate key escrow systems
could be needed.

____________________________________________________________


              5.7 PROCESS THROUGH WHICH POLICY
            ON ESCROWED ENCRYPTION WAS DEVELOPED


   Much criticism of the Clipper initiative has focused on the
process through which the standard was established.
Specifically, the Clipper initiative was developed out of the
public eye, with minimal if any connection to the relevant
stakeholders in industry and the academic community, and
appeared to be "sprung" on them with an announcement in the
*New York Times*. Furthermore, a coherent approach to the
international dimensions of the problem was not developed, a
major failing since business communications are global in
nature. After the announcement of the Clipper initiative, the
federal government promulgated the EES despite a
near-unanimous condemnation of the proposed standard in the
public comments on it.

   Similar comments have been expressed with respect to the
August-September 1995 Administration proposal to relax export
controls on 64-bit sofStware products if they are properly
escrowed. This proposal, advertised by the Administration as
the follow-up to the Gore-Cantwell letter of July 1994,(32)
emerged after about a year of virtual silence from the
Administration during which public interactions with industry
were minimal.

   The result has been a tainting of escrowed encryption that
inhibits unemotional discussion of its pros and cons and makes
it difficult to reach a rational and well-balanced decision.

----------

   (32) On July 20, 1994, Vice President Al Gore wrote to
Representative Maria Cantwell (D-Washington) expressing a
willingness to enter into "a new phase of cooperation among
government, industry representatives and privacy advocates
with a goal of trying to develop a key escrow encryption
system that will provide strong encryption, be acceptable to
computer users worldwide, and address our national security
needs as well." The Vice President went on to say that "we
welcome the opportunity to work with industry to design a more
versatile, less expensive system. Such a key escrow system
would be implementable in software, firmware, hardware, or any
combination thereof, would not rely upon a classified
algorithm, would be voluntary, and would be exportable.... We
also recognize that a new key escrow encryption system must
permit the use of private-sector key escrow agents as one
option... Having a number of escrow agents would give
individuals and businesses more choices and flexibility in
meeting their needs for secure communications." Letter
reprinted in Lance Hoffman (ed.), *Building in Big Brother:
The Cryptographic Policy Debate*, Springer-Verlag, New York,
1995, pp. 236-238.

____________________________________________________________


         5.8 AFFILIATION AND NUMBER OF ESCROW AGENTS


   Any deployment of escrowed encryption on a large scale
raises the question of who the escrow agents should be. (The
equally important question of their responsibilities and
liabilities is the subject of Section 5.9.) The original
Clipper/Capstone escrow approach called for agencies of the
executive branch to be escrow agents; at this writing, the
Administration's position seems to be evolving to allow
parties in the private sector to be escrow agents. Different
types of escrow agents have different advantages and
disadvantages.

   The use of executive branch agencies as escrow agents has
a number of advantages. Executive branch escrow agents can be
funded directly and established quickly, rather than depending
on the existence of a private sector market or business for
escrow agents. Their continuing existence depends not on
market forces but on the willingness of the U.S. Congress to
appropriate money to support them. Executive branch escrow
agents may well be more responsive than outside escrow agents
to authorized requests from law enforcement for keys.
Executive branch escrow agents can be enjoined more easily
from divulging to the target of a surveillance the fact that
they turned over a key to law enforcement officials, thereby
helping to ensure that a surveillance can be performed
surreptitiously. In the case of FISA intercepts, executive
branch escrow agents may be more protective of associated
classified information (such as the specific target of the
intercept). Under sovereign immunity, executive branch escrow
agents can disavow civil liability for unauthorized disclosure
of keys.

   Of course, from a different standpoint, most of these
putative advantages can be seen as disadvantages. If direct
government subsidy is required to support an escrow operation,
by definition it lacks the support of the market.(33) The high
speed with which executive branch escrow agents were
established suggested to critics that the Administration was
attempting to present the market with a fait accompli with
respect to escrow. A higher degree of responsiveness to
requests for keys may well coincide with greater disregard for
proper procedure; indeed, since one of the designated escrow
agencies (Treasury) also has law enforcement jurisdiction and
the authority to conduct wiretaps under some circumstances, a
Treasury escrow agent might well be faced with a conflict of
interest in managing keys. The obligation to keep the fact of
key disclosure secret might easily lead to circumvention and
unauthorized disclosures. The lack of civil liability and of
criminal penalties for improper disclosure might reduce the
incentives for compliance with proper procedure. Most
importantly, all executive branch workers are in principle
responsible to a unitary source of authority (the President).
Thus, concerns are raised that any corruption at the top
levels of government might diffuse downward, as exemplified by
past attempts by the Executive Office of the President to use
the Internal Revenue Service to harass its political enemies.
One result might be that executive branch escrow agents might
divulge keys improperly; a second result might be that
executive branch escrow agents could be more likely to reveal
the fact of key disclosure to targets in the executive branch
under investigation.

   Some of the concerns described above could be mitigated by
placement of escrow agents in the judiciary branch of
government on the theory that since judicial approval is
needed to conduct wiretaps, giving the judiciary control of
escrowed keys would in fact give it a way of enforcing the
Title III requirements for legal authorization. On the other
hand, the judiciary branch would have to rule on procedures
and misuse, thereby placing it at risk of a conflict of
interest should alleged misdeeds in the judiciary branch come
to light. Matters related to separation of powers between the
executive and judicial branches of government are also
relevant.

   The best argument for government escrow agents is that
government can be held politically accountable. When a
government does bad things, the government can be replaced.
Escrow agents must be trustworthy, and the question at root is
whether it is more appropriate to trust government or a
private party; the views on this point are diverse and often
vigorously defended.

   The committee believes that government-based escrow agents
present few problems when used to hold keys associated with
government work. Nonetheless, mistrust of government-based
escrow agents has been one of the primary criticisms of the
EES. If escrowed encryption is to serve broad social purposes
across government and the private sector, it makes sense to
consider other possible escrow agents in addition to
government escrow agents:

   +    Private organizations established to provide key
registration services (on a fee-for-service basis). Given that
some business organizations have certain needs for data
retrieval and monitoring of communications as described in
Chapter 3, such needs might create a market for private escrow
agents. Some organizations might charge more and provide users
with bonding against failure or improper revelations of keys;
other organizations might charge less and not provide such
bonding.

   +    Vendors of products with encryption capabilities and
features for exceptional access. Vendors acting as escrow
agents would face a considerable burden in having to comply
with registration requirements and might be exposed to
liability.(34) At the same time, vendors could register keys
at the time of manufacture or by default at some additional
expense.(35)

   +    Customers themselves. In the case of a corporate
customer, a specially trusted department within the
corporation that purchases escrowed encryption products could
act as an escrow agent for the corporation. Such "customer
escrow" of a corporation's own keys may be sufficient for its
needs; customer escrow would also enable the organization to
know when its keys have been revealed. Since legal entities
such as corporations will continue to be subject to extant
procedures of the law enforcement court order or subpoena, law
enforcement access to keys under authorized circumstances
could be assured. In the case of individual customers who are
also the end users of the products they purchase, the
individual could simply store a second copy of the relevant
keys as a form of customer escrow.

   Note especially that site licenses(36) to corporations
account for the largest portion of vendor sales in
software.(37) In a domestic context, corporations are entities
that are subject to legal processes in the United States that
permit law enforcement authorities to obtain information in
the course of a criminal investigation. In a foreign context,
exports to certain foreign corporations can be conditioned on
a requirement that the foreign corporation be willing to
escrow its key in such a manner that U.S. law enforcement
authorities would be able to have access to that information
under specified circumstances and in a manner to be determined
by a contract binding on the corporation. (The use of contract
law in this manner is discussed further in Chapter 7.) In
short, sales of escrowed encryption to foreign and domestic
corporate users could be undertaken in such a way that a very
large fraction of the installed user base would in fact be
subject to legal processes for obtaining information on keys.

   Nongovernment escrow agents are subject to the laws of the
government under whose jurisdiction they operate. In addition,
they raise other separate questions. For example, a criminal
investigation may target the senior officials of a
corporation, who may themselves be the ones authorized for
access to customer-escrowed keys; they might then be notified
of the fact of being wiretapped. The same would be true of end
users controlling their own copies of keys. Private
organizations providing key-holding services might be
infiltrated or even set up by criminal elements that would
frustrate lawful attempts to obtain keys or would even use the
keys in their possession improperly. Private organizations may
be less responsive to government requests than government
escrow agents. Finally, private organizations motivated by
profit and tempted to cut corners might be less responsible in
their conduct.

   A second important issue regarding escrow agents deals with
their number. Concentrating escrow arrangements in a few
escrow agents may make law enforcement access to keys more
convenient, but also focuses the attention of those who may
attempt to compromise those facilities -- the "big, fat
target" phenomenon -- because the aggregate value of the keys
controlled by these few agents is, by assumption, large.(38)
On the other hand, given a fixed budget, concentrating
resources on a few escrow agents may enable them to increase
the security against compromise, whereas spreading resources
among many escrow agents may leave each one much more open to
compromise. Indeed, the security of a well-funded and
well-supported escrow agent may be greater than that of the
party that owns the encryption keys; in this case, the
incremental risk that a key would be improperly compromised by
the escrow agent would be negligible. Increasing the number of
escrow agents so that each would be responsible for a
relatively small number of keys reduces the value of
compromising any particular escrow agent but increases the
logistical burdens, overhead, and expense for the nation. The
net impact on security against compromise of keys is very
scenario-dependent.(39)

----------

   (33) The original Clipper/Capstone proposal made no
provision for parties other than law enforcement authorities
to approach escrow agents, and in this context could be
regarded as a simple law enforcement initiative with no
particular relevance to the private sector. However, in light
of the Administration's arguments concerning the desirability
of escrowed encryption to meet the key backup needs of the
private sector, the importance of relevance to the private
sector is obvious.

   (34) For example, in the early days of an offering by AT&T
to provide picture-phone meeting services, the question arose
as to whether AT&T or the end user should provide security.
The business decision at the time was that AT&T should not
provide security because of the legal implications -- a
company that guaranteed security but failed to provide it was
liable. (Ironically, at least one major computer vendor
declined to provide encryption services for data
communications and storage on the grounds that encryption
would be provided by AT&T.) While today's AT&T support for the
PictureTel product line for videoconferencing (which provides
encryption capabilities) may suggest a different AT&T
perspective on the issue of who is responsible for providing
security, companies will have to decide for themselves their
own tolerable thresholds of risk for liability.

   (35) The cost of vendor registration would be high in the
case of certain software products. Specifically, products that
are distributed by CD-ROM must be identical, because it would
be very expensive (relative to current costs) to ship CD-ROMs
with unique serial numbers or keys. To some extent, the same
is true of products distributed by network -- it is highly
convenient and desirable from the vendor's perspective to have
just one file that can be downloaded upon user request,
although it is possible and more expensive to provide numbered
copies of software distributed by network.

   (36) Under a site license, a corporation agrees with a
vendor on a price for a certain (perhaps variable) number of
licenses to use a given software package. Site licenses also
include agreements on and conditions for support and
documentation.

   (37) The dominance of corporate sales over sales to
individuals was cited in the NSA/Department of Commerce
survey. See p. III-2.

   (38) Note also that maintaining the physical security of
escrow agents, especially government escrow agents, may be
especially critical; sabotage or destruction of an escrow
agent facility might well be seen in some segments of society
as a blow for freedom and liberty.

   (39) A similar issue arises with respect to certificate
authorities for authentication. As discussed in Chapter 2, a
cryptography-based authentication of an individual's identity
depends on the existence of an entity -- a certification
authority -- that is trusted by third parties as being able to
truly certify the identity of the individual in question.
Concentration of certification authority into a single entity
would imply that an individual would be vulnerable to any
penetration or malfeasance of the entity and thus to all of
the catastrophic effects that tampering with an individual's
digital identity would imply.

____________________________________________________________


           5.9 RESPONSIBILITIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF
       ESCROW AGENTS AND USERS OF ESCROWED ENCRYPTION


   Regardless of who the escrow agents are, they will hold
certain information and have certain responsibilities and
obligations.(40) Users of escrowed encryption also face
potential liabilities.


           5.9.1 Partitioning Escrowed Information

   Consider what precisely an escrow agent would hold. In the
simplest case, a single escrow agent would hold all of the
information needed to provide exceptional access to encrypted
information. (In the Clipper case, two escrow agents would be
used to hold the unit keys to all EES-compliant telephones.)

   A single escrow agent for a given key poses a significant
risk of single-point failure -- that is, the compromise of
only one party (the single escrow agent) places at risk all
information associated with that key. The Clipper/Capstone
approach addresses this point by designating two executive
branch agencies (Commerce and Treasury), each holding one
component (of two) of the unit key of a given Clipper/
Capstone-compliant device. Reconstruction of a unit key
requires the cooperation of both agencies. This approach was
intended to give the public confidence that their keys were
secure in the hands of the government.

   In the most general case, an escrow system can be designed
to separate keys into n components but with the mathematics of
the separation process arranged so that exceptional access
would be possible if the third party were able to acquire any
k (for k less than or equal to n) of these components.(41)
This approach is known as the "k-of-n" approach. For the
single escrow agent, k = 1 and n = 1; for the Clipper/Capstone
system, k = 2 and n = 2. But it is possible to design systems
where k is any number less than n; for example, the consent of
any three (k) of five (n) escrow agents could be sufficient to
enable exceptional access. Obviously, the greater the number
of parties that are needed to consent, the more cumbersome
exceptional access becomes.

   It is a policy or business decision as to what the specific
values of k and n should be, or if indeed the choice about
specific values should be left to users. The specific values
chosen for k and n reflect policy judgments about needs for
recovery of encrypted data relative to user concerns about
improper exceptional access. Whose needs? If a national policy
decision determines k and n, it is the needs of law
enforcement and national security weighed against user
concerns. If the user determines k and n, it is the needs of
the user weighed against law enforcement and national security
concerns.

----------

   (40) Nothing in this discussion is intended to preclude the
possibility that an organization serving as an escrow agent
might also have responsibilities as a certification authority
(for authentication purposes, as described in Chapter 2).

   (41) See for example, Silvio Micali, "Fair Public-Key
Cryptosystems," in *Advances in Cryptology -- Crypto '92*,
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1993, pp. 113-138.

____________________________________________________________


     5.9.2 Operational Responsibilities of Escrow Agents

   For escrowed encryption to play a major national role in
protecting the information infrastructure of the nation and
the information of businesses and individuals, users must be
assured about the operational obligations and procedures of
escrow agents. Clear guidelines will be required to regulate
the operational behavior of escrow agents, and clear
enforcement mechanisms must be set into place to ensure that
the escrow agents comply with those guidelines. While these
guidelines and mechanisms might come into existence through
normal market forces or cooperative agreements within
industries, they are more likely to require a legal setting
that would also include criminal penalties for malfeasance.

   Guidelines are needed to assure the public and law
enforcement agencies of two points:

   +    That information relevant to exceptional access (the
full key or a key fragment) will be divulged upon proper legal
request and that an escrow agent will not notify the key owner
of disclosure until it is legally permissible to do so, and

   +    That information relevant to exceptional access will
be divulged only upon proper legal request.

   Note that the fulfillment of the second requirement has
both an "abuse of authority" component and a technical and
procedural component. The first relates to an individual (an
"insider") who is in a position to give out the relevant
information but also to abuse his position by giving out that
information without proper authorization. The second relates
to the fact that even if no person in the employ of an escrow
agent improperly gives out the relevant information, an
"outsider" may be able to penetrate the security of the escrow
agent and obtain the relevant information without compromising
any particular individual. Such concerns are particularly
relevant to the extent that escrow agents are connected
electronically, since they would then be vulnerable in much
the same ways that all other parties connected to a network
are vulnerable. The security of networked computer systems is
difficult to assure with high confidence,(42) and the security
level required of escrow agents must be high, given the value
of their holdings to unauthorized third parties.

   Thus, those concerned about breaches of confidentiality
must be concerned about technical and procedural weaknesses of
the escrow agent infrastructure that would enable outsiders to
connect remotely to these sites and obtain keys, as well as
about insiders abusing their positions of trust. Either
possibility could lead not just to individual keys being
compromised, but also to wholesale compromise of all of the
keys entrusted to escrow agents within that infrastructure.
From a policy standpoint, it is necessary to have a
contingency plan that would facilitate recovery from wholesale
compromise.

   Box 5.6 describes law enforcement views on the
responsibilities of escrow agents. Box 5.7 describes draft
Administration views on requirements for maintaining the
integrity and security of escrow agents; Box 5.8 describes
draft Administration views on requirements for assuring access
to escrowed keys.

----------

   (42) See, for example, Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council,
*Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age*,
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1991.

____________________________________________________________


               5.9.3 Liabilities of Escrow Agents

   In order to assure users that key information entrusted to
escrow agents remains secure and authorized third parties that
they will be able to obtain exceptional access to encrypted
data when necessary, escrow agents and their employees must be
held accountable for improper behavior and for the use of
security procedures and practices that are appropriate to the
task of protection.

   Liabilities can be criminal or civil (or both). For
example, criminal penalties could be established for the
disclosure of keys or key fragments to unauthorized parties or
for the refusal to disclose such information to appropriately
authorized parties. It is worth noting that the implementing
regulations accompanying the EES proposal run counter to this
position, in the sense that they do not provide specific
penalties for failure to adhere to the procedures for
obtaining keys (which only legislation could do). The
implementing regulations specifically state that "these
procedures do not create, and are not intended to create, any
substantive rights for individuals intercepted through
electronic surveillance, and noncompliance with these
procedures shall not provide the basis for any motion to
suppress or other objection to the introduction of electronic
surveillance evidence lawfully acquired."(43)

   Questions of civil liability are more complex. Ideally,
levels of civil liability for improper disclosure of keys
would be commensurate with the loss that would be incurred by
the damaged party. For unauthorized disclosure of keys that
encrypt large financial transactions, this level is
potentially very large.(44) On the other hand, as a matter of
public policy, it is probably inappropriate to allow such
levels of damages. More plausible may be a construct that
provides what society, as expressed through the U.S. Congress,
thinks is reasonable (Box 5.9). Users of escrow agents might
also be able to buy their own insurance against unauthorized
disclosure. Note that holding government agencies liable for
civil damages might require an explicit change in the Federal
Tort Claims Act that waives sovereign immunity in certain
specified instances, or other legislative changes.

   On the other hand, the amount of liability associated with
compromising information related to data communications is
likely to dwarf the analogous volume for voice communications.
If escrowed encryption is adopted widely in data
communications, compromise of escrow agents holding keys
relevant to network encryption may be catastrophic, and may
become easier as the number of access points that can be
penetrated becomes larger.

   Note that liability of escrow agents may be related to the
voluntary use of escrow. A party concerned about large
potential losses would have alternatives to escrowed
encryption -- namely, unescrowed encryption -- that would
protect the user against the consequences of improper key
disclosure. Under these circumstances, a user whose key was
compromised could be held responsible for his loss because he
did not choose to use unescrowed encryption; an escrow agent's
exposure to liability would be limited to the risks associated
with parties that use its services. On the other hand, if
escrowed encryption were the only cryptography permitted to be
used, then by assumption the user would have no alternatives,
and so in that case, an escrow agent would shoulder a larger
liability.

   Another aspect of liability could arise if the escrow
agents were also charged with the responsibilities of
certificate authorities. Under some circumstances, it might be
desirable for the functions of escrow agents and certificate
authorities to be carried out by the same organization. Thus,
these dual-purpose organizations would have all of the
liabilities carried by those who must certify the authenticity
of a given party.

----------

   (43) U.S. Department of Justice, *Authorization Procedures
for Release of Encryption Key Components in Conjunction with
Intercepts Pursuant to Title 111 and FISA*, February 4, 1994.
Reprinted in Lance J. Hoffman (ed.), *Building in Big
Brother*, 1995, pp. 243-246.

   (44) Even if these transactions are authenticated (as most
large transactions would be), large transactions that are
compromised could lead to loss of bids and the like by the
firms involved in the transaction.

____________________________________________________________


    5.10 THE ROLE OF SECRECY IN ENSURING PRODUCT SECURITY


   The fact that EES and the Fortezza card involve classified
algorithms has raised the general question of the relationship
between secrecy and the maintenance of a product's
trustworthiness in providing security. Specifically, the
Clipper/Capstone approach is based on a secret (classified)
encryption algorithm known as Skipjack. In addition, the
algorithm is implemented in hardware (a chip) whose design is
classified. The shroud of secrecy surrounding the hardware and
algorithms needed to implement EES and Fortezza makes skeptics
suspect that encrypted communications could be decrypted
through some secret "back door" (i.e., without having the
escrowed key).(45)

   Logically, secrecy can be applied to two aspects of an
encryption system: the algorithms used and the nature of the
implementation of these algorithms. Each is addressed in turn.
Box 5.10 describes a historical perspective on cryptography
and secrecy that is still valid today.

----------

   (45) A kind of de facto secret back door can result from
the fact that vendors of security products employing Clipper
or Capstone technology are not likely to advertise the fact
that the relevant encryption keys are escrowed with the U.S.
government. Thus, even if the escrowing capability is "open"
in the sense that no one involved makes any attempt to hide
that fact, a user that does not know enough to ask about the
presence or absence of escrowing features may well purchase
such products without realizing their presence. Functionally,
escrowing of which the user is ignorant is equivalent for that
user to a "secret" back door.

____________________________________________________________


                  5.10.1 Algorithm Secrecy

   The use of secret algorithms for encryption has advantages
and disadvantages. From an information security standpoint, a
third party who knows the algorithm associated with a given
piece of ciphertext has an enormous advantage over one who
does not -- if the algorithm is unknown, cryptanalysis is much
more difficult. Thus, the use of a secret algorithm by those
concerned about information security presents an additional
(and substantial) barrier to those who might be eavesdropping.
From a signals intelligence (SIGINT) standpoint, it is
advantageous to keep knowledge of good encryption out of the
hands of potential SIGINT targets. Thus, if an algorithm
provides good cryptographic security, keeping the algorithm
secret prevents the SIGINT target from implementing it. In
addition, if an algorithm is known to be good, studying it in
detail can reveal a great deal about what makes any algorithm
good or bad. Algorithm secrecy thus helps to keep such
information out of the public domain.(46)

   On the other hand, algorithm secrecy entails a number of
disadvantages as well. One is that independent analysis of a
secret algorithm by the larger community is not possible.
Without such analysis, flaws may remain in the algorithm that
compromise the security it purports to provide. If these flaws
are kept secret, users of the algorithm may unknowingly
compromise themselves. Even worse, sophisticated users who
need high assurances of security are unable to certify for
themselves the security it provides (and thus have no sense of
the risks they are taking if they use it). In most cases, the
real issue is whether the user chooses to rely on members of
the academic cryptography communities publishing in the open
literature, or upon members of the classified military
community or members of the commercial cryptography community
who are unable to fully disclose what they know about a
subject because it is classified or proprietary.

   A second disadvantage of algorithm secrecy is the fact that
if a cryptographic infrastructure is based on the assumption
of secrecy, public discovery of those secrets can compromise
the ends to be served by that infrastructure. For example, if
a cryptographic infrastructure based on a secret algorithm
were widely deployed, and if that algorithm contained a secret
and unannounced "back door" that allowed those with knowledge
of this back door easy access to encrypted data, that
infrastructure would be highly vulnerable and could be
rendered untrustworthy in short order by the public disclosure
of the back door.

   A third disadvantage is that a secret algorithm cannot be
implemented in software with any degree of assurance that it
will remain secret. Software, as it exists ready for actual
installation on a computer (so-called object code or
executable code), can usually be manipulated with special
software tools to yield an alternate form (namely, source
code) reflecting the way the creating programmer designed it,
and therefore revealing many, even most, of its operational
details, including any algorithm embedded within it. This
process is known as "decompiling" or "disassembly" and is a
standard technique in the repertoire of software
engineers.(47)

   All of the previous comments apply to secrecy whether it is
the result of government classification decisions or vendor
choices to treat an algorithm as a trade secret. In addition,
vendors may well choose to treat an algorithm as a trade
secret to obtain the market advantages that proprietary
algorithms often bring. Indeed, many applications of
cryptography for confidentiality in use today are based on
trade-secret algorithms such as RC2 and RC4.

----------

   (46) Of course, if other strong algorithms are known
publicly, the force of this argument is weakened from a
practical standpoint. For example, it is not clear that the
disclosure of Skipjack would be harmful from the standpoint of
making strong algorithms public, because triple-DES is already
publicly known, and triple-DES is quite strong.

   (47) As one example, the RC2 encryption algorithm,
nominally a trade secret owned by RSA Data Security Inc. was
posted to the Internet in early 1996, apparently as the result
of an apparent "disassembly" of a product embedding that
algorithm. Personal communication, Robert Baldwin, RSA Data
Security Inc., May 16, 1996.

____________________________________________________________


      5.10.2 Product Design and Implementation Secrecy

   Product design and implementation secrecy has a number of
advantages. For example, by obscuring how a product has been
designed, secrecy makes it more difficult for an outsider to
reverse-engineer the product in such a way that he could
understand it better or, even worse, modify it in some way.
Since vulnerabilities sometimes arise in implementation,
keeping the implementation secret makes it harder for an
attacker to discover and then exploit those vulnerabilities.
Design and implementation secrecy thus protects any secrets
that may be embedded in the product for a longer time than if
they were to be published openly.

   On the other hand, it is taken as an axiom by those in the
security community that it is essentially impossible to
maintain design or implementation secrecy indefinitely. Thus,
the question of the time scale of reverse engineering is
relevant -- given the necessary motivation, how long will it
take and how much in resources will be needed to reverse-
engineer a chip or a product?

   +    For software, reverse engineering is based on
decompilation or disassembly (as described in Section 5.10.1).
The larger the software product, the longer it takes to
understand the original program; even a small one can be
difficult to understand, especially if special techniques have
been used to obscure its functionality. Modification of the
original program can present additional technical difficulties
(the product may be designed in such a way that disassembling
or decompiling the entire product is necessary to isolate
critical features that one might wish to modify). Certain
techniques can be used to increase the difficulty of making
such modifications,(48) but there is virtual unanimity in the
computer community that modification cannot be prevented
forever. How robust must these anti-reverse-engineering
features be? The answer is that they must be robust enough
that the effort needed to overcome them is greater than the
effort needed to develop an encryption system from scratch.

   +    For hardware, reverse engineering takes the form of
physical disassembly and/or probing with x-rays of the
relevant integrated circuit chips. Such chips can be designed
to resist reverse engineering in a way that makes it difficult
to understand what various components on the chip do. For
example, the coating on a die used to fabricate a chip may be
designed so that removal of the coating results in removal of
one or more layers of the chip, thus destroying portions of
what was to be reverse-engineered. The chip may also be
fabricated with decoy or superfluous elements that would
distract a reverse engineer. For all of these reasons, reverse
engineering for understanding a chip's functions is difficult
(though not impossible), and under some circumstances, it is
possible to modify a chip. In general, reverse engineering of
the circuits and devices inside a chip requires significant
expertise and access to expensive tools.(49)

   An important factor that works against implementation
secrecy is the wide distribution of devices or products whose
implementation is secret. It is difficult to protect a device
against reverse engineering when millions of those devices are
distributed around the world without any physical barriers
(except those on the implementation itself) to control access
to them. Everyone with an EES-compliant telephone or a
Foretzza card, for example, will have access to the chip that
provides encryption and key escrow services.

   The comments above refer to the feasibility of maintaining
implementation secrecy. But there are issues related to its
desirability as well. For example, implementation secrecy
implies that only a limited number of vendors can be trusted
to produce a given implementation. Thus, foreign production of
Clipper/Capstone-compliant devices under classification
guidelines raises problems unless foreign producers are
willing to abide by U.S. security requirements.

   A more important point is that implementation secrecy also
demands trust between user and supplier/vendor. Within the
government, users within government agencies generally trust
other parts of the government to provide adequate services as
a supplier. But in the private sector, such trust is not
necessarily warranted. Users that are unable to determine for
themselves what algorithms are embedded in computer and
communications products used must trust the vendor to have
provided algorithms that do what the user wants done, and the
vast majority of users fall into this category. Such opacity
functions as a de facto mechanism of secrecy that also impedes
user knowledge about the inner workings and that is exploited
by the distributors of computer viruses and worms. As a
result, choosing between the use of self-implemented source
code and a pre-packaged program to perform certain functions
is in many ways analogous to choosing between use of
unclassified and classified algorithms.

   An information security manager with very high security
needs must make trade-offs of assurance vs. cost. In general,
the only way to be certain that the algorithms used are the
ones claimed to be used is to implement them on one's own. Yet
if the manager lacks the necessary knowledge and experience,
a self-implementation may not be as secure or as capable as
one developed by a trusted vendor. A self-implementer also
carries the considerable burden of development costs that a
commercial vendor can amortize over many sales.

   As a result, security-conscious users of products whose
inner workings are kept secret must (1) trust the vendor
implicitly (based on factors such as reputation), or (2) face
the possibility of various extreme scenarios. Here are two:

   +    The hardware of a secret device can be dynamically
modified; for example, electrically erasable read-only
memories can direct the operation of a processor. One possible
scenario with secret hardware is that a chip that initially
provides Clipper-chip functionality might be reprogrammed when
it first contacts a Clipper/Capstone-compliant device to allow
a nonescrowed but unauthorized access to it; such a means of
"infection" is common with computer viruses. In other words,
the Skipjack algorithm may have been embedded in the chip when
it was first shipped, but after the initial contact, the
algorithm controlling the chip is no longer Skipjack.

   +    An algorithm that is not Skipjack is embedded by the
manufacturer in chips purporting to be Clipper or Capstone
chips. Since the utility of a vector test depends on the
availability of an independent implementation of the
algorithm, it is impossible for the user to perform this test
independently if the user has no reference point. As a result,
the user has no access to an independent test of the chip that
is in the user's "Clipper/Capstone-compliant" device, and so
any algorithm might have been embedded.(50)

   Any technically trained person can invent many other such
scenarios. Thus, public trust in the technical desirability of
the EES and Fortezza for exceptional access depends on a high
degree of trust in the government, entirely apart from any
fears about compromising escrow agents wherever they are
situated.

   Of course, some of the same considerations go beyond the
Skipjack algorithm and the Clipper/Capstone approach. In
general, users need confidence that a given product with
encryption capabilities indeed implements a given algorithm.
Labeling a box with the letters "DES" does not ensure that the
product inside really implements DES. In this case, the fact
that the DES algorithm is publicly known facilitates testing
to verify that the algorithm is implemented correctly.(51) If
its source code is available for inspection, other
security-relevant aspects of a software product can be
examined to a certain extent, at least up to the limits of the
expertise of the person checking the source code. But for
software products without source code, and especially for
hardware products that cannot easily be disassembled, and even
more so for hardware products that are specifically designed
to resist disassembly, confidence in the nonalgorithm security
aspects of the product is more a matter of trusting the vendor
than of the user making an independent technical verification
of an implementation.(52) In some sectors (e.g., banking,
classified military applications), however, independent
technical verification is regarded as essential.

   Finally, a given product may properly implement an
algorithm but still be vulnerable to attacks that target the
part of the product surrounding the implementation of the
algorithm. Such vulnerabilities are most common in the initial
releases of products that have not been exposed to public test
and scrutiny. For example, a security problem with the
Netscape Navigator's key-generation facility could have been
found had the implementation in which the key generator was
embedded been available for public examination prior to its
release, even though the encryption algorithm itself was
properly implemented.(53)

----------

   (48) For example, Trusted Information Systems Inc. of
Glenwood, Maryland, has advocated an approach to preventing
modification that relies on the placement of integrity locks
at strategic locations. With such an approach, a change to the
disassembled source code would have to be reflected properly
in all relevant integrity locks; doing so might well involve
disassembly of an entire product rather than of just one
module of the product. Nevertheless, such an approach cannot
prevent modification, although it can make modification more
difficult. Such anti-reverse-engineering features may also
increase the difficulty of vendor maintenance of a product.
Increased difficulty may be a price vendors must pay in order
to have secure software implementations.

   (49) Estimates of the cost to reverse-engineer the Clipper
chip nondestructively cover a wide range, from "doable in
university laboratories with bright graduate students and
traditions of reverse engineering" (as estimated by a number
of electrical engineers in academia with extensive experience
in reverse engineering) to as much as $30 million to $50
million (as estimated in informal conversations between JASON
members and DOD engineers). The cost may well be lower if
large numbers of chips are available for destructive
inspection.

   (50) According to Dorothy Denning, the review team for
Skipjack (see footnote 5 of this chapter) compared the output
from Clipper chips with output from the software version of
Skipjack that the review team obtained for review to verify
that the algorithm on the chips was the same as the software
version. Personal communication, Dorothy Denning, Georgetown
University.

   (51) As described in Chapter 4, the product tester can use
the product to encrypt a randomly chosen set of values with a
randomly chosen key, and compare the cncrypted output to the
known correct result obtained through the use of a product
known to implement the algorithm correctly. This is known as
a vector test.

   (52) Such a comment is not meant to preclude the
possibility of an independent certifying authority, a kind of
"Consumers' Reports" for crypto equipment and products. Such
organizations have been proposed to evaluate and certify
computer security, and as of this writing, three U.S. firm
have received NIST approval to evaluate the conformance of
products to FIPS-140-1, the FIPS for cryptography modules.

   (53) This security problem is referenced in footnote 34,
Chapter 2. The lack of prior vetting for Netscape Navigator is
described by Kathleen Murphy, "A Second Security Breach," *Web
Week*, Volume 1(6), October 1995, p. 8.

____________________________________________________________


            5.11 THE HARDWARE-SOFTWARE CHOICE IN
                   PRODUCT IMPLEMENTATION


   After the Clipper initiative was announced, and as the
debate over escrowed encryption broadened to include the
protection of data communications arld stored data, the mass
market software industry emphasized that a hardware solution
to cryptographic security -- as exemplified by the Clipper
chip -- would not be satisfactory. They argued with some force
that only a software-based approach would encourage the
widespread use of encryption envisioned for the world's
electronic future, making several points:

   +    Customers have a strong preference for using
integrated cryptographic products. While stand-alone products
with encryption capabilities could be made to work, in general
they lack operational convenience for the applications that
software and systems vendors address.

   +    Compared to software, hardware is expensive to
manufacture. In particular, the relevant cost is not simply
the cost of the hardwale encryption device compared to a
software encryption package,(54) but also the cost of any
modifications to the hardware environment needed to accept the
hardware encryption device.(55) For example, one major company
noted to the committee that the adoption of the Fortezza card,
a card that fits into the PC-card slots available on most
laptop computers, would be very expensive in their desktop
computing environment, because most of their desktop computers
do not have a PC-card slot and would have to be modified to
accept a Fortezza card. By contrast, a software encryption
product can simply be loaded via common media (e.g., a CD-ROM
or a floppy disk) or downloaded via a network.

   +    The fact that hardware is difficult to change means
that problems found subsequent to deployment are more
difficult to fix. For example, most users would prefer to
install a software fix by loading a CD-ROM into their
computers than to open up their machines to install a new chip
with a hardware fix.

   +    Hardware-based security products have a history of
being market-unfriendly. Hardware will, in general, be used
only to the extent that the required hardware (and its
specific configuration) is found in user installations.
Moreover, hardware requirements can be specified for software
only when that hardware is widely deployed. For example, a
technical approach to the software piracy problem has been
known for many years; the approach requires the installation
of special-purpose hardware that is available only to those
who obtain the software legitimately. This "solution" has
failed utterly in the marketplace, and software piracy remains
a multibillion-dollar-per-year problem.

   +    Hardware for security consumes physical space and
power in products. For example, a hardware-based encryption
card that fits into an expansion slot on a computer takes up
a slot permanently, unless the user is willing to install and
deinstall the card for every use. It also creates an
additional power demand on electronic devices where power and
battery life are limited.

   In general, products with encryption capabilities today use
software or hardware or both to help ensure security.(56) The
crux of the hardware-software debate is what is good enough to
ensure security. The security needed to manage electronic cash
in the international banking system needs to be much stronger
than the security to protect wordprocessing files created by
private individuals. Thus, software-based cryptography might
work for the latter, while hardware-based cryptography might
be essential for the former.

   Products with encryption capabilities must be capable of
resisting attack. But since such products are often embedded
in operating environments that are themselves insecure, an
attacker may well choose to attack the environment rather than
the product itself. For example, a product with encryption
capabilities may be hardware-based, but the operating
environment may leave the encryption keys or the unencrypted
text exposed.(57) More generally, in an insecure environment,
system security may well not depend very much on whether the
cryptography per se is implemented in hardware or software or
whether it is weak or strong.

   In the context of escrowed encryption, a second security
concern arises -- a user of an escrowed encryption product may
wish to defeat the escrow mechanism built into the product.
Thus, the escrow features of the product must be bound to the
product in a way that cannot be bypassed by some
reverse-engineered modification to the product. This
particular problem is known as binding or, more explicitly,
escrow binding; escrow binding is an essential element of any
escrow scheme that is intended to provide exceptional access.

   Concern over how to solve the escrow binding problem was
the primary motivation for the choice of a hardware approach
to the Clipper initiative. As suggested in Section 5.10, the
functionality of a hardware system designed to resist change
is indeed difficult to change, and so hardware implementations
have undeniable advantages for solving the escrow binding
problem.(58) An EES-compliant device would be a telephone
without software accessible to the user, and would provide
high assurance that the features for exceptional access would
not be bypassed.

   As the debate has progressed, ideas for software-based
escrow processes have been proposed. The primary concern of
the U.S. government about software implementations is that
once a change has been designed and developed that can bypass
the escrow features ("break the escrow binding"), such a
change can be easily propagated through many different
channels and installed with relatively little difficulty. In
the committee's view, the important question is whether
software solutions to the escrow binding problem can provide
an acceptable level of protection against the reverse
engineer. Whether an escrowed encryption product is
implemented in software (or hardware for that matter), the
critical threshold is the difficulty of breaking the escrow
binding (i.e., bypassing the escrowing features) compared to
the effort necessary to set up an independent unescrowed
encryption system (perhaps as part of an integrated product).
If it is more difficult to bypass the escrow features than to
build an unescrowed system, then "rogues" who want to defeat
exceptional access will simply build an unescrowed system. The
bottom line is that an escrowed encryption product does not
have to be perfectly resistant to breaking the escrow binding.

   A possible mitigating factor is that even if a software
"patch" is developed that would break the escrow binding of an
escrowed encryption software product, it may not achieve wide
distribution even among the criminals that would have the most
to gain from such a change. Experience with widely deployed
software products (e.g., operating systems) indicates that
even when a software fix is made available for a problem in a
product, it may not be implemented unless the anomalous or
incorrect software behavior is particularly significant to an
end user. If this is the case for products that are as
critical as operating systems, it may well be true for
products with more specialized applications. On the other side
of the coin, many parties (e.g., criminals) may care a great
deal about the presence of escrowing and thus be highly
motivated to find "fixes" that eliminate escrowing.

----------

   (54) In a recent contract, a vendor agreed to provide
Fortezza cards at $69 per card. See Paul Constance, "After
Complaining $99 Was Too Low, Forteza Vendors Come in at $69,"
*Government Computer News*, October 2, 1995, p. 6.

   (55) One vendor is manufacturing a circuit board for
encryption that fits into a 3.5" floppy disk drive. However,
this device does not employ the Capstone/Fortezza approach.
See Elizabeth Sikorovsky, "Device Offers Alternative to PC
Card-Based Encryption," *Federal Computer Week*, November 13,
1995, pp. 29 and 35.

   (56) Note that the dividing line between hardware and
software is not always clear. In particular, product designers
use the term "firmware" to refer to a design approach that
enters software into a special computer memory (an integrated
circuit chip) that usually is subsequently unchangeable
(read-only memory; ROM). Sometimes an alternate from of memory
is used that does permit changes under controlled conditions
(electrically programmable ROM; EPROM). Such software-
controlled hardware (microprogrammed hardware) has the
convenience that the functionality of the item can be updated
or changed without redesign of the hardware portion.

   (57) Peter G. Neumann, *Can Systems Be Trustworthy with
Software-Implemented Cryptography?*, SRI International, Menlo
Park, California, October 28, 1994.

   (58) A device controlled by software stored in a
programmable read-only memory is for all intents and purposes
the same as "pure hardware" in this context.

____________________________________________________________


       5.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR GENERATION OF UNIT KEYS


   Key generation is the process by which cryptographic keys
are generated. Two types of keys are relevant:

   +    A session key is required for each encryption of
plaintext into ciphertext; this is true whether the
information is to be stored or communicated. Ultimately, the
intended recipients of this information (those who retrieve it
from storage or those who receive it at the other end of a
communications channel) must have the same session key. For
maximum information security, a new session key is used with
every encryption. (See footnote 7 of this chapter for more
discussion.)

   +    A unit key is a cryptographic key associated with a
particular product or device owned or controlled by a specific
individual. Unit keys are often used to protect session keys
from casual observation in escrowed encryption products, but
precisely how they are used depends on the specifics of a
given product.

   In the most general case, the session key is a random
number, and a different one is generated anew for each
encryption. But the unit key is a cryptographic variable that
typically changes on a much longer time scale than does the
session key. In many escrowed encryption schemes, knowledge of
the unit key enables a third party to obtain the session key
associated with any given encryption.

   The Clipper/Capstone approach requires that the unit key be
generated by the manufacturer at the time of manufacture ("at
birth") and then registered prior to sale with escrow agents
in accordance with established procedures. Such an approach
has one major advantage from the standpoint of those who may
require exceptional access in the future -- it guarantees
registration of keys, because users need not take any action
to ensure registration.

   At the same time, since the Clipper/Capstone approach is
based on a hardware-based implementation that is not
user-modifiable, a given device has only one unit key for its
entire lifetime, although at some cost, the user may change
the Clipper chip embedded in the device.(59) If the unit key
is compromised, the user's only recourse is to change the
chip. A user who does not do so violates one basic principle
of information security -- frequent changing of keys (or
passwords).(60) In addition, the fact that all unit keys are
known at the time of manufacture raises concerns that all keys
could be kept (perhaps surreptitiously) in some master
databank that would be accessible without going to the
designated escrow agents. The implication is that the user is
forced to trust several organizations and individuals involved
with the manufacturing process. Such trust becomes an implicit
aspect of the secrecy associated with EES-compliant devices.

   One alternative to unit key generation at birth is the
generation (or input) of a new unit key at user request. This
approach has the advantage that the user can be confident that
no one else retains a copy of the new key without his or her
knowledge. The disadvantage is that escrow of that key would
require explicit action on the user's part for that purpose.

   An alternative that has some of the advantages of each
approach is to install and register a unit key at birth, but
to design the product to allow the user to change the unit key
later. Thus, all products designed in this manner would have
"default" unit keys installed by the manufacturer and recorded
with some escrow agent; each of these keys would be different.
Users who took the trouble to install a new unit key would
have to take an explicit action to escrow it, but in many
cases, the inconvenience and bother of changing the unit key
would result in no action being taken. Thus, valid unit keys
would be held by escrow agents in two cases -- for products
owned by users who did not change the unit key, and for
products owned by users who chose to register their new keys
with escrow agents.

   Who is responsible for the collection of unit keys? Under
the Clipper/Capstone approach, the responsible party is the
U.S. government. But if nongovemment agencies were to be
responsible for escrowing keys (see Section 5.8), a large
market with many vendors producing many different types of
encryption products in large volume could result in a large
administrative burden on these vendors.

   The specific implementation of EES also raises an
additional point. As proposed, EES requires that unit keys be
given to government authorities upon presentation of legal
authorization. If these keys are still available to the
authorities after the period of legal authorization has
expired, the EES device is forever open to government
surveillance. To guard against this possibility,
Administration plans for the final Clipper key escrow system
provide for automatic key deletion from the decrypting
equipment upon expiration of the authorized period. Key
deletion is to be implemented on the tamper-resistant device
that law enforcement authorities will use to decrypt
Clipper-encrypted traffic. However, by early 1996, the
deployed interim key escrow system had not been upgraded to
include that feature.

----------

   (59) A Clipper chip costs about $10 when bought in large
lots. (Personal communication, March 22, 1996, Jimmy Dolphin,
Mykotronx.) Even when including retail mark-up costs and
labor, the cost of changing a Clipper chip is likely to be
less than $100.

   (60) However, since the Skipjack algorithm is classified,
simple knowledge of the unit key (or the session key) would
enable only those with knowledge of the algorithm to decrypt
the session key (or the session).

____________________________________________________________


     5.13 ISSUES RELATED TO THE ADMINISTRATION PROPOSAL
      TO EXEMPT 64-BIT ESCROWED ENCRYPTION IN SOFTWARE


   As noted in Chapter 4, the Administration has proposed to
treat software products with 64-bit encryption using any
algorithm as it currently treats products that are based on
40-bit RC2/RC4 algorithms, providing that products using this
stronger encryption are "properly escrowed." This change is
intended to make available to foreign customers of U.S.
software products stronger cryptographic protection than they
currently have today.

   This proposal has raised several issues.


         5.13.1 The Definition of "Proper Escrowing"

   The definition of "proper escrowing" (as the phrase is used
in the Administration's proposed new export rules in Box 5.3)
is that keys should be escrowed only with "escrow agent(s)
certified by the U.S. Government, or certified by foreign
governments with which the U.S. Government has formal
agreements consistent with U.S. law enforcement and national
security requirements." These agents would not necessarily be
govermnent agencies, although in principle they could be.

   The obvious question is whether foreign consumers will be
willing to purchase U.S. products with encryption capabilities
when it is openly announced that the information security of
those products could be compromised by or with the assistance
of escrow agents certified by the U.S. government. While the
draft definition does envision the possibility that escrow
agents could be certified by foreign governments (e.g., those
in the country of sale), formal agreements often take a long
time to negotiate, during which time U.S. escrow agents would
hold the keys, or the market for such products would fail to
develop.

   For some applications (e.g., U.S. companies doing business
with foreign suppliers), interim U.S. control of escrow agents
may prove acceptable. But it is easy to imagine other
applications for which it would not, and in any case a larger
question is begged: What would be the incentive for foreign
users to purchase such products from U.S. vendors if
comparably strong but unescrowed foreign products with
encryption capabilities were available? As the discussion in
Chapter 2 points out, integrated products with encryption
capabilities are generally available today from U.S. vendors.
However, how long the U.S. monopoly in this market will last
is an open question.

   The issue of who holds the keys in an international context
is explored further in Appendix G.


              5.13.2 The Proposed Limitation of
               Key Lengths to 64 Bits or Less

   The most important question raised by the 64-bit limitation
is this: If the keys are escrowed and available to law
enforcement and national security authorities, why does it
matter how long the keys are? In response to this question,
senior Administration officials have said that the limitation
to 64 bits is a way of hedging against the possibility of
finding easily proliferated ways to break the escrow binding
built into software, with the result that U.S. software
products without effective key escrow would become available
worldwide. Paraphrasing the remarks of a senior Administration
official at the 1995 International Cryptography Institute,
"The 64-bit limit is there because we might have a chance of
dealing with a breakdown of software key escrow 10 to 15 years
down the line; but if the key length implied a work factor of
something like triple-DES, we would *never* [emphasis in
original] be able to do it."

   Two factors must be considered in this argument. One is the
likelihood that software key escrow can in fact be
compromised. This subject is considered in Sections 5.10.2 and
5.11. But a second point is the fact that the 64-bit limit is
easily circumvented by multiple encryption under some
circumstances. Specifically, consider a stand-alone
security-specific product for file encryption that is based on
DES and is escrowed. Such a product -- in its unaltered state
-- meets all of the proposed draft criteria for export. But
disassembly of the object code of the program (to defeat the
escrow binding) may also reveal the code for DES encryption in
the product. Once the source code for the DES encryption is
available, it is a technically straightforward exercise to
implement a package that will use the product to implement a
triple-DES encryption on a file.


                         5.14 RECAP


   Escrowed encryption is one of several approaches to
providing exceptional access to encrypted information. The
U.S. government has advanced a number of initiatives to
support the insertion of escrow features into products with
encryption capabilities that will become available in the
future, including the Escrowed Encryption Standard, the
Capstone/Fortezza initiative, and a proposal to liberalize
export controls on products using escrowed encryption. Its
support of escrowed encryption embodies the government's
belief that the benefit to law enforcement and national
security from exceptional access to encrypted information
outweighs the damage owing to loss of confidentiality that
might occur with the failure of procedures intended to prevent
unauthorized access to the escrow mechanism.

   Escrowed encryption provides *more* confidentiality than
leaving information unprotected (as most information is
today), but less confidentiality than what could be provided
by good implementations of unescrowed cryptography. On the
other hand, escrowed encryption provides more capability for
exceptional access under circumstances of key loss or
unavailability than does unescrowed encryption. All users will
have to address this trade-off between level of
confidentiality and key unavailability.

   The central questions with respect to escrowed encryption
are the following:

   +    With what degree of confidence is it possible to
ensure that third parties will have access to encrypted
information only under lawfully authorized circumstances?

   +    What is the trade-off for the user between potentially
lower levels of confidentiality and higher degrees of
confidence that encrypted data will be available when
necessary?

____________________________________________________________

             BOX 5.1 Key Technical Attributes of
                   the Clipper Initiative

   1. A chip-unique secret key, the "unit key" or "device key"
or "master key" would be embedded in the chip at the time of
fabrication and could be obtained by law enforcement officials
legally authorized to do so under Title III.

   2. Each chip-unique device key would be split into two
components.

   3. The component parts would be deposited with and held
under high security by two trusted thirdparty escrow agents
proposed to be agencies of the U.S. government. Note:
"Third-party" is used here to indicate parties other than
those participating in the communication.

   4. A law enforcement access field (LEAF) would be a
required part of every transmission. The LEAF would contain
(a) the current session key, encrypted with a combination of
the device-unique master key and a different but secret
"family key" also permanently embedded in the chip and (b) the
chip serial number, also protected by encryption with the
family key.

   5. Law enforcement could use the information in the LEAF to
identify the particular device of interest, solicit its
master-key components from the two escrow agents, combine
them, recover the session key, and eventually decrypt the
encrypted traffic.

   6. The encryption algorithm on the chip would be secret.

   7. The chip would be protected against reverse engineering
and other attempts to access its technical details.

----------

SOURCE: Dorothy Denning and Miles Smid, "Key Escrowing Today,"
*IEEE Communications*, Volume 32(9), September 1994, pp.
58-68. Available on-line from http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~
denning/ crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.

____________________________________________________________

                BOX 5.2 The Relationship of 
                Escrowed Encryption to SIGINT

   Escrowed encryption -- especially the EES and the Clipper
initiative -- is a tool of law enforcement more than of
signals intelligence. The EES was intended primarily for
domestic use, although exports of EES-compliant devices have
not been particularly discouraged. Given that the exceptional
access feature of escrowed encryption has been openly
announced, purchase by foreign governments for secure
communications is highly unlikely.

   On the other hand, the U.S. government has classified the
Skipjack algorithm to keep foreign adversaries from learning
more about good cryptography. In addition, wide deployment and
use of escrowed encryption would complicate the task of
signals intelligence, simply because individual keys would
have to be obtained one by one for communications that might
or might not be useful. (Still, EES devices would be better
for SIGINT than unescrowed secure telephones, in the sense
that widely deployed secure telephones without features for
exceptional access would be much harder to penetrate.)

   Finally, the impact of escrowed encryption on intelligence
collection abroad depends on the specific terms of escrow
agent certification. Even assuming that all relevant escrow
agents are located within the United States (a question
addressed at greater length in Appendix G), the specific
regulations governing their behavior are relevant.
Intelligence collections of digital data can proceed with few
difficulties if regulations permit escrow agents to make keys
available to national security authorities on an automated
basis and without the need to request keys one by one. On the
other hand, if the regulations forbid wholesale access to keys
(and the products in question do not include a "universal key"
that allows one key to decrypt messages produced by many
devices), escrowed encryption would provide access primarily
to specific encrypted communications that are known to be
intrinsically interesting (e.g., known to be from a particular
party of interest). However, escrowed encryption without
wholesale access to keys would not provide significant
assistance to intelligence collections undertaken on a large
scale.

____________________________________________________________

           BOX 5.3 Administration's Draft Software
         Key Escrow Export Criteria -- November 1995

                     Key Escrow Feature

   1. The key(s) required to decrypt the product's key escrow
cryptographic functions' ciphertext shall be accessible
through a key escrow feature.

   2. The product's key escrow cryptographic functions shall
be inoperable until the key(s) is escrowed in accordance with
#3.

   3. The product's key escrow cryptographic functions' key(s)
shall be escrowed with escrow agent(s) certified by the U.S.
Government, or certified by foreign governments with which the
U.S. Government has formal agreements consistent with U.S. law
enforcement and national security requirements.

   4. The product's key escrow cryptographic functions'
ciphertext shall contain, in an accessible format and with a
reasonable frequency, the identity of the key escrow agent(s)
and information sufficient for the escrow agent(s) to identify
the key(s) required to decrypt the ciphertext.

   5. The product's key escrow feature shall allow access to
the key(s) needed to decrypt the product's ciphertext
regardless of whether the product generated or received the
ciphertext.

   6. The product's key escrow feature shall allow for the
recovery of multiple decryption keys during the period of
authorized access without requiring repeated presentations of
the access authorization to the key escrow agent(s).


                     Key Length Feature

   7. The product's key escrow cryptographic functions shall
use an unclassified encryption algorithm with a key length not
to exceed sixty-four (64) bits.

   8. The product's key escrow cryptographic functions shall
not provide the feature of multiple encryption (e.g.,
triple-DES).


                  Interoperability Feature

   9. The product's key escrow cryptographic functions shall
interoperate only with key escrow cryptographic functions in
products that meet these criteria, and shall not interoperate
with the cryptographic functions of a product whose key escrow
encryption function has been altered, bypassed, disabled, or
otherwise rendered inoperative.


      Design, Implementation, and Operational Assurance

   10. The product shall be resistant to anything that could
disable or circumvent the attributes described in #1 through
#9.

----------

SOURCE: National Institute of Standards and Technology, *Draft
Software Key Escrow Encryption Export Criteria*, November 6,
1995. Available on line from http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/
keyescrow/criteria.txt (11/95 version; NIST Web page).

____________________________________________________________

    BOX 5.4 Non-Clipper Proposals for Escrowed Encryption

   AT&T CryptoBackup. CryptoBackup is an AT&T proprietary
design for a commercial or private key-escrow encryption
system. The data encryption key for a document is recovered
through a backup recovery vector (BRV), which is stored in the
document header. The BRV contains the document key encrypted
under a master public key of the escrowed agent(s). (David P.
Maher, "Crypto Backup and Key Escrow," *Communications of the
ACM*, March 1996.)

   Bankers Trust Secure Key Escrow Encryption System
(SecureKEES). Employees of a corporation register their
encryption devices (e.g., smart card) and private encryption
keys with one or more commercial escrow agents selected by the
corporation. (SecureKEES product literature, CertCo, Bankers
Trust Company.)

   Bell Atlantic Yaksha System. An on-line key security server
generates and distributes session keys and file keys using a
variant of the RSA algorithm. The server transmits the keys to
authorized parties for data recovery purposes. (Ravi Ganesan,
"The Yaksha Security System," *Communications of the ACM*,
March 1996.)

   Royal Holloway Trusted Third Party Services. This proposed
architecture for a public key infrastructure requires that the
trusted third parties associated with pairs of communicating
users share parameters and a secret key. (Nigel Jefferies,
Chris Mitchell, and Michael Walker, *A Proposed Architecture
for Trusted Third Party Services*, Royal Holloway, University
of London, 1995.)

   RSA Secure(TM). This file encryption product provides data
recovery through an escrowed master public key, which can be
split among up to 255 trustees using a threshold scheme. (RSA
Secure(TM), product literature from RSA Data Security Inc.)

   Nortel Entrust. This commercial product archives users'
private encryption keys as part of the certificate authority
function and public-key infrastructure support. (Warwick Ford,
"Entrust Technical Overview," White Paper, Nortel Secure
Networks, October 1994.)

   National Semiconductor CAKE. This proposal combines a TIS
Commercial Key Escrow (CKE) with National Semiconductor's
PersonaCard(TM). (W.B. Sweet, "Commercial Automated Key Escrow
(CAKE): An Exportable Strong Encryption Proposal," National
Semiconductor, iPower Business Unit. June 4. 1995.)

   TIS Commercial Key Escrow (CKE). This is a commercial key
escrow system for stored data and file transfers. Data
recovery is enabled through master keys held by a Data
Recovery Center. (Stephen T. Walker, Stephen B. Lipner, Carl
M. Ellison, and David M. Balenson, "Commercial Key Recovery,"
*Communications of the ACM*, March 1996.)

   TECSEC VEIL(TM). This commercial product provides file (and
object) encryption. Private key escrow is built into the key
management infrastructure. (Edward M. Scheidt and Jon L.
Roberts, "Private Escrow Key Management," TECSEC Inc., Vienna,
Va. See also TECSEC VEIL(TM), product literature.)

   Viacrypt PGP/BE (Business Edition). Viacrypt is a
commercialized version of PGP, the free Internet-downloadable
software package for encrypted communications. The Business
Edition of Viacrypt optionally enables an employer to decrypt
all encrypted files or messages sent or received by an
employee by carrying the session key encrypted under a
"Corporate Access Key" in the header for the file or message.
(See http://www.viacrypt.com.)

----------

SOURCE: Most of these examples are taken from Dorothy Denning
and Miles Smid, "Key Escrowing Today," *IEEE Communications*,
Volume 32, 1994, pp. 58-68. Available on line from
http://www.cosc.georgetown.edu/~denning/crypto/Key-Escrowing-Today.txt.

____________________________________________________________

          BOX 5.5 Law Enforcement Requirements for
                Escrowed Encryption Products


                 Information Identification

   +    The product is unable to encrypt/decrypt data unless
the necessary information to allow law enforcement to decrypt
communications and stored information is available for release
to law enforcement.

   +    A field is provided that readily identifies the
information needed to decrypt each message, session, or file
generated or received by the user of the product.

   +    Repeated involvement by key escrow agents [KEAs] is
not required to obtain the information needed to decrypt
multiple conversations and data messages (refer to expeditious
information release by KEA's) during a period of authorized
communications interception.


           Provision of Subject's Information Only

   +    Only information pertaining to the communications or
stored information generated by or for the subject is needed
for law enforcement decryption.


            Subversions of Decryption Capability

   +    The product is resistant against alterations that
disable or bypass law enforcement decryption capabilities.

   +    Any alteration to the product to disable or bypass law
enforcement's decryption capability requires a significant
level of effort regardless of whether similar alterations have
been made to any other identical version of that product.


                        Transparency

   +    The decryption of an intercepted communication is
transparent to the intercept subject and all other parties to
the communication except the investigative agency and the key
escrow agent.


               Access to Technical Details to
                 Develop Decrypt Capability

   +    Law enforcement may need access to a product's
technical details to develop a key escrow decrypt capability
for that product.

----------

SOURCE: Federal Bureau of Investigation, viewgraphs of
presentation to *International Cryptography Institute 1995*,
September 22, 1995.

____________________________________________________________

   BOX 5.6 Law Enforcement Requirements for Escrow Agents


                  Information Availability

   +    The information necessary to allow law enforcement the
ability to decrypt communications and stored information is
available. KEAs [key escrow agents] should maintain or be
capable of generating all the necessary decrypt (key)
information.

   +    Key and/or related information needed to decrypt
communications and stored information is retained for extended
time periods. KEAs should be able to decrypt information
encrypted with a device or product's current and/or former
key(s) for a time period that may vary depending on the
application (e.g., voice vs. stored files).

   +    A backup capability exists for key and other
information needed to decrypt communications and stored
information. Thus, a physically separate backup capability
should be available to provide redundancy of resources should
the primary capability fail.


            Key Escrow Agent (KEA) Accessibility

   +    KEAs should be readily accessible. For domestic
products, they should reside and operate in the United States.
They should be able to process proper requests at any time;
most requests will be submitted during normal business hours,
but exigent circumstances (e.g., kidnappings, terrorist
threats) may require submission of requests during nonbusiness
hours.


                 Information Release by KEAs

   +    The information needed for decryption is expeditiously
released upon receipt of a proper request. Since
communications intercepts require the ability to decrypt
multiple conversations and data messages sent to or from the
subject (i.e., access to each session or message key) during
the entire intercept period, only one initial affirmative
action should be needed to obtain the relevant information.
Exigent circumstances (e.g. kidnappings, terrorist threats)
will require the release of decrypt information within a
matter of hours.


       Confidentiality and Safeguarding of Information

   +    KEAs should safeguard and maintain the confidentiality
of information pertaining to the request for and the release
of decrypt information. KEAs should protect the
confidentiality of the person or persons for whom a key escrow
agent holds keys or components thereof, and protect the
confidentiality of the identity of the agency requesting
decrypt information or components thereof and all information
concerning such agency's access to and use of encryption keys
or components thereof.

   For law enforcement requests, KEA personnel knowledgeable
of an interception or decryption should be of good character
and have not been convicted of crimes of moral turpitude or
otherwise bearing on their trustworthiness. For national
security requests, KEA personnel viewing and or storing
classified requests must meet the applicable U.S. Government
requirements for accessing and or storing classified
information. Efforts are ongoing to examine unclassified
alternatives.

   +    KEAs should be legitimate organizations without ties
to criminal enterprises, and licensed to conduct business in
the United States. KEAs for domestic products should not be a
foreign corporation, a foreign country, or an entity thereof.

----------

SOURCE: Federal Bureau of Investigation, viewgraphs of
presentation to *International Cryptography Institute 1995*,
September 22, 1995.

____________________________________________________________

      BOX 5.7 Proposed U.S. Government Requirements for
        Ensuring Escrow Agent Integrity and Security

   1. Escrow agent entities shall devise and institutionalize
policies, procedures, and mechanisms to ensure the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of key escrow
related information.

   a. Escrow agent entities shall be designed and operated so
   that a failure by a single person, procedure, or mechanism
   does not compromise the confidentiality, integrity or
   availability of the key and/or key components (e.g., two
   person control of keys, split keys, etc.)

   b. Unencrypted escrowed key and or key components that are
   stored and or transmitted electronically shall be protected
   (e.g., via encryption) using approved means.

   c. Unencrypted escrowed key and or key components stored
   and/or transferred via other media/methods shall be
   protected using approved means (e.g., safes).

   2. Escrow agent entities shall ensure due form of escrowed
key access requests and authenticate the requests for escrowed
key and or key components.

   3. Escrow agent entities shall protect against disclosure
of information regarding the identity of the person/
organization whose key and/or key components is requested, and
the fact that a key and/or key component was requested or
provided.

   4. Escrow agent entities shall enter keys/key components
into the escrowed key database immediately upon receipt.

   5. Escrow agent entities shall ensure at least two copies
of any key and/or key component in independent locations to
help ensure the availability of such key and or key components
due to unforeseen circumstances.

   6. Escrow agent entities that are certified by the U.S.
government shall work with developers of key escrow encryption
products and support a feature that allows products to verify
to one another that the products' keys have been escrowed with
a U.S.-certified agent.

-----------

SOURCE: National Institute of Standards and Technology, *Draft
Software Key Escrow Encryption Export Criteria*, November 6,
1995. Available on line from http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/
keyescrow/criteria.txt (11/95 version; NIST Web page).

____________________________________________________________

        BOX 5.8 Requirements for Ensuring Key Access

   7. An escrow agent entity shall employ one or more persons
who possess a SECRET clearance for purposes of processing
classified (e.g., FISA) requests to obtain keys and/or key
components.

   8. Escrow agent entities shall protect against unauthorized
disclosure of information regarding the identity of the
organization requesting the key or key components.

   9. Escrow agent entities shall maintain data regarding all
key escrow requests received, key escrow components released,
database changes, system administration accesses, and dates of
such events, for purposes of audit by appropriate government
officials or others.

   10. Escrow agent entities shall maintain escrowed keys
and/or key components for as long as such keys may be required
to decrypt information relevant to a law enforcement
investigation.

   11. Escrow agent entities shall provide key/key components
to authenticated requests in a timely fashion and shall
maintain a capability to respond more rapidly to emergency
requirements for access.

   12. Escrow agent entities shall possess and maintain a
Certificate of Good Standing from the State of incorporation
(or similar local/national authority).

   13. Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S.
government a Dun & Bradstreet/TRW number or similar credit
report pointer and authorization.

   14. Escrow agent entities shall possess and maintain an
Errors & Omissions insurance policy.

   15. Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S.
government a written copy of, or a certification of the
existence of a corporate security policy governing the key
escrow agent entity's operation.

   16. Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S.
government a certification that the escrow agent will comply
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws concerning
the provisions of escrow agent entity services.

   17. Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S.
government a certification that the escrow agent entity will
transfer to another approved escrow agent the escrow agent
entity's equipment and data in the event of any dissolution or
other cessation of escrow agent entity operations.

   18. Escrow agent entities for products sold in the United
States shall not be a foreign country or entity thereof, a
national of a foreign country, or a corporation of which an
alien is an officer or more than one-fourth of the stock which
is owned by aliens or which is directly or indirectly
controlled by such a corporation. Foreign escrow agent
entities for products exported from the United States will be
approved on a case by case basis as law enforcement and
national security agreements can be negotiated.

   19. Escrow agent entities shall provide to the U.S.
government a certification that the escrow agent entity will
notify the U.S. government in writing of any changes in the
forgoing information.

   20. Fulfillment of these and the other criteria are subject
to periodic recertification.

----------

SOURCE: National Institute of Standards and Technology, *Draft
Key Escrow Agent Criteria*, December 1, 1995. Available on
line from http://csrc.ncsl.nist.gov/keyescrow/agent-criteria.
txt.

____________________________________________________________

         BOX 5.9 Statutory Limitations on Liability

   Government can promote the use of specific services and
products by assuming some of the civil liability risks
associated with them. Three examples follow:

   +    The Atomic Energy Damages Act, also called the
Price-Anderson Act, limits the liability of nuclear power
plant operators for harm caused by a nuclear incident (such as
an explosion or radioactive release). To operate a nuclear
power plant, a licensee must show the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (U.S. NRC) that it maintains financial protection
(such as private insurance, self-insurance, or other proof of
financial responsibility) equal to the maximum amount of
insurance available at reasonable cost and reasonable terms
from private sources, unless the U.S. NRC sets a lower
requirement on a case-specific basis. The U.S. NRC indemnifies
licensees from all legal liability arising from a nuclear
incident, including a precautionary evacuation, which is in
excess of the required financial protection, up to a maximum
combined licensee-and-government liability of $560 million.
Incidents that cause more than $560 million in damage will
trigger review by the Congress to determine the best means to
compensate the public, including appropriating funds.

   +    The Commercial Space Launch Act provides similar
protection to parties licensed to launch space vehicles or
operate launch sites, but with a limit on the total liability
the United States accepts. The licensee must obtain financial
protection sufficient to compensate the maximum probable loss
that third parties could claim for harm or damage, as
determined by the secretary of transportation. The most that
can be required is $500 million or the maximum liability
insurance available from private sources, whichever is lower.
The United States is obligated to pay successful claims by
third parties in excess of the required protection, up to $1.5
billion, unless the loss is related to the licensee's willful
misconduct. The law also requires licensees to enter into
reciprocal waivers of claims with their contractors and
customers, under which each party agrees to be responsible for
losses it sustains.

   +    The swine flu vaccination program of 1976 provides an
example in which the United States accepted open-ended
liability and paid much more than expected. Doctors predicted
a swine flu epidemic, and Congress appropriated money for the
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) to pay four
pharmaceutical manufacturers for vaccines to be distributed
nationwide. The manufacturers' inability to obtain liability
insurance delayed the program until Congress passed
legislation (P.L. 94-380) in which the United States assumed
all liability other than manufacturer negligence. The
government's liability could thus include, for example,
harmful side effects. Claims against the United States would
be processed under the Federal Tort Claims Act (which provides
for trial by judge rather than jury and no punitive damages,
among other distinctions). Some of the 45 million people who
were immunized developed complications, such as Guillain-Barre
syndrome; consequently, the program was canceled. By September
1977. 815 claims had been filed. The United States ultimately
paid more than $100 million to settle claims, and some
litigation is still pending today. Manufacturers, who by law
were liable only for negligence, were not sued.

____________________________________________________________

    BOX 5.10 Perspectives on Secrecy and System Security

   The distinction between the general system (i.e., a
product) and the specific key (of an encrypted message) was
first articulated by Auguste Kerckhoffs in his historic book
*La Cryptographie Militaire*, published in 1883. Quoting David
Kahn in *The Codebreakers*:

   Kerckhoffs deduced [that] ... compromise of the system
   should not inconvenience the correspondents.... Perhaps the
   most startling requirement, at first glance, was the second
   .... Kerckhoffs explained that by "system" he meant "the
   material part of the system; tableaux, code books, or
   whatever mechanical apparatus may be necessary," and not
   "the key proper." Kerckhoffs here makes for the first time
   the distinction, now basic to cryptology, between the
   general system and the specific key. Why must the general
   system "not require secrecy"? ... Because Kerckhoffs said,
   "it is not necessary to conjure up imaginary phantoms and
   to suspect the incorruptibility of employees or subalterns
   to understand that, if a system requiring secrecy were in
   the hands of too large a number of individuals, it could be
   compromised at each engagement.... This has proved to be
   true, and Kerckhoffs' second requirement has become widely
   accepted under a form that is sometimes called the
   fundamental assumption of military cryptography: that the
   enemy knows the general system. But he must still be unable
   to solve messages in it without knowing the specific key.
   In its modern formulation, the Kerckhoffs doctrine states
   that secrecy must reside solely in the keys."(1)

   A more modern expression of this sentiment is provided by
Dorothy Denning:

   The security of a cryptosystem should depend only on the
   secrecy of the keys and not on the secrecy of the
   algorithms.... This requirement implies the algorithms must
   be inherently strong; that is, it should not be possible to
   break a cipher simply by knowing the method of
   encipherment. This requirement is needed because the
   algorithms may be in the public domain, or known to a
   cryptanalyst.(2)

----------

   (1)  David Kahn, *The Codebreakers*, Macmillan, New York,
1967, p. 235.

   (2)  Dorothy Denning, *Cryptography and Data Security*,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1982, p. 8.

____________________________________________________________

[End chapter 5]






