{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f36\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f37\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f39\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f40\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f41\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f42\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f43\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f44\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f56\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f57\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f59\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}
{\f60\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f61\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f62\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f63\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}
{\f64\fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 \styrsid13051012 Plain Text;}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid5836027\rsid13051012\rsid16190392}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.3416;}{\info{\title The Complete Windows Trojans Paper}
{\subject Trojans}{\author Dancho Danchev}{\keywords Trojans, Security}{\operator Anthony Aykut}{\creatim\yr2002\mo9\dy26\hr12\min27}{\revtim\yr2002\mo9\dy26\hr12\min27}{\version2}{\edmins5}{\nofpages25}{\nofwords10339}{\nofchars58938}
{\*\manager Anthony Aykut}{\*\company Frame4 Security Systems}{\*\category Trojans}{\nofcharsws69139}{\vern16453}}\margl1319\margr1319 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180
\dgvspace180\dghorigin1319\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule\nobrkwrptbl\snaptogridincell\allowfieldendsel\wrppunct\asianbrkrule\rsidroot13051012 \fet0\sectd 
\linex0\headery708\footery708\colsx708\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl\sectrsid13051012\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid13051012 \f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid5836027\charrsid13051012 The Complete Windows Trojans Paper
\par By Dancho Danchev                            
\par dancho.danchev@frame4.com
\par http://www.frame4.com/
\par 
\par Version 1.0
\par ===============================================================================
\par  _____                         _  _   
\par |  ___| __ __ _ _ __ ___   ___| || |  
\par | |_ | '__/ _` | '_ ` _ \\ / _ \\ || |_ 
\par |  _|| | | (_| | | | | | |  __/__   _|
\par |_|  |_|  \\__,_|_| |_| |_|\\___|  |_|
\par 
\par This paper is a Frame4 Security Systems publication, all rights reserved. You
\par may (re-)distribute the text as long as the content is not changed in any way
\par and with this header text intact. If you want to serve this paper on your web
\par site/FTP/Newsgroup/etc., I encourage you to do so but please do not change it
\par in any way without the prior permission of the author.
\par 
\par IMPORTANT -- THIS DOCUMENT IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY. To the maximum
\par extent permitted by applicable law, in no event shall Frame4 Security Systems
\par be liable for any damages whatsoever, (including, without limitation, damages
\par for loss of any business profits, business interruption, loss of any business
\par information, or other pecuniary loss) arising out of the use, or inability to
\par use any software, and/or procedures outlined in this document, even if Frame4
\par Security Systems has been advised of the possibility of such damage(s). There
\par are NO warranties with regard to this information, but the paper may help you
\par improve your Windows security a lot.
\par 
\par This paper is the property of Frame4 Security Systems, all rights reserved.
\par Copyright (c) 1999-2002 Frame4 Security Systems -- http://www.frame4.com/
\par -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\par 
\par Author's Notes:
\par 
\par This is the updated version of my paper written a long while ago. During that
\par time I have seen it on every security/hacking site I came across and I'm glad
\par you're all placing it in your archives as recommended reading. Now, many more
\par sections and updates have been added so be sure that you will reading new and
\par interesting aspects regarding the topic. The paper will answer many questions
\par people keep asking in general about trojans like "how are attackers infecting
\par me" and "how to protect from trojans".
\par 
\par If you have any other questions about the topic including ideas, suggestions,
\par comments, etc., please do not hesitate to express your opinion. If you have a
\par lot to say on the topic and/or I have missed some aspects then please contact
\par me and contribute to the next update, and of course full credit will be given
\par to you and your ideas.
\par -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\par 
\par Table of Contents
\par -----------------
\par 01.What Is This Paper About              
\par 02.What Is A Trojan Horse                 
\par 03.How Do Trojans Work                           
\par 04.Trojans Variations                
\par    -Remote Access Trojans
\par    -Password Sending Trojans
\par    -Keylogging Trojans 
\par    -Destructive Trojans
\par    -Denial Of Service (DoS) Attack Trojans
\par    -Proxy/Wingate Trojans
\par    -FTP Trojans
\par    -Detection Software Killers
\par 05.The Future Of Windows Trojans
\par 06.How Can I Get Infected
\par    -Via ICQ
\par    -Via IRC
\par    -Via Attachments
\par    -Via Physical Access
\par    -Via Browser And E-mail Software Bugs
\par    -Via Netbios(File Sharing)
\par 07.Fake Programs
\par 08.Untrusted Sites And FreeWare Software
\par 09.How Are They Detecting My Internet Presence
\par 10.What Is The Attacker Looking For
\par 11.Intelligence With Trojans
\par 12.Trojan Ports
\par 13.How Do I Know I'm Infected
\par 14.Anti-Virus (AV) Scanners
\par 15.Anti-Trojan Software
\par 16.After You Clean Yourself
\par 17.Online Scanning Services
\par 18.Advice
\par 19.Links Section
\par 20.Final Words
\par -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\par 
\par 
\par 1.What is this paper about?
\par   -------------------------
\par 
\par The Complete Trojans Text is a paper about Windows Trojans, how they work,
\par their variations and, of course, strategies to minimise the risk of infection.
\par 
\par Links to special detection software are included as well as many other topics
\par never discussed before. This paper is not only intended to be for the average
\par Internet/Windows user who wants to know how to protect his/her machine from
\par Trojan Horses or just want to know about their usage, variations, prevention
\par and future, but will also be interesting for the advanced user, to read
\par another point of view.
\par 
\par Windows Trojans are just a small aspect of Windows Security but you will soon
\par realise how dangerous and destructive they could be while reading the paper.
\par 
\par 
\par 2.What Is A Trojan Horse?
\par   -----------------------
\par 
\par A Trojan horse is:
\par 
\par - An unauthorised program contained within a legitimate program. This
\par   unauthorised program performs functions unknown (and probably unwanted) by
\par   the user.
\par 
\par - A legitimate program that has been altered by the placement of unauthorised
\par   code within it; this code performs functions unknown (and probably unwanted)
\par   by the user.
\par 
\par - Any program that appears to perform a desirable and necessary function but
\par   that (because of unauthorised code within it that is unknown to the user)
\par   performs functions unknown (and definitely unwanted) by the user. 
\par 
\par The Trojan Horse got its name from the old mythical story about how the
\par Greeks gave their enemy a huge wooden horse as a gift during the war. The
\par enemy accepted this gift and they brought it into their kingdom, and during
\par the night, Greek soldiers crept out of the horse and attacked the city,
\par completely overcoming it.
\par 
\par 
\par 3.How Do Trojans Work?
\par   --------------------
\par   
\par Trojans come in two parts, a Client part and a Server part. When the victim
\par (unknowingly) runs the server on its machine, the attacker will then use the
\par Client to connect to the Server and start using the trojan. TCP/IP protocol
\par is the usual protocol type used for communications, but some functions of the
\par trojans use the UDP protocol as well. When the Server is being run on the
\par victim's computer, it will (usually) try to hide somewhere on the computer,
\par start listening on some port(s) for incoming connections from the attacker,
\par modify the registry and/or use some other autostarting method.
\par 
\par It's necessary for the attacker to know the victim's IP address to connect to
\par his/her machine. Many trojans have features like mailing the victim's IP, as
\par well as messaging the attacker via ICQ or IRC. This is used when the victim
\par has dynamic IP which means every time you connect to the Internet you get a
\par different IP (most of the dial-up users have this). ADSL users have static
\par IPs so the infected IP is always known to the attacker and this makes it
\par considerably easier to connect to your machine.
\par 
\par Most of the trojans use Auto-Starting methods so even when you shut down your
\par computer they're able to restart and again give the attacker access to your
\par machine. New auto-starting methods and other tricks are discovered all the
\par time. The variety starts from "joining" the trojan into some executable file
\par you use very often like explorer.exe, for example, and goes to the known
\par methods like modifying the system files or the Windows Registry. System files
\par are located in the Windows directory and here are short explanations of their
\par abuse by the attackers:
\par 
\par - Autostart Folder
\par   The Autostart folder is located in C:\\Windows\\Start Menu\\Programs\\startup
\par   and as its name suggests, automatically starts everything placed there.
\par - Win.ini
\par   Windows system file using load=Trojan.exe and run=Trojan.exe to execute
\par   the Trojan
\par - System.ini
\par   Using Shell=Explorer.exe trojan.exe results in execution of every file
\par   after Explorer.exe
\par - Wininit.ini
\par   Setup-Programs use it mostly; once run, it's being auto-deleted, which is
\par   very handy for trojans to restart
\par - Winstart.bat
\par   Acting as a normal bat file trojan is added as @trojan.exe to hide its
\par   execution from the user
\par - Autoexec.bat
\par   It's a DOS auto-starting file and it's used as auto-starting method like
\par   this -> c:\\Trojan.exe
\par - Config.sys
\par   Could also be used as an auto-starting method for trojans
\par - Explorer Startup
\par   Is an auto-starting method for Windows95, 98, ME and if c:\\explorer.exe
\par   exists, it will be started instead of the usual c:\\Windows\\Explorer.exe,
\par   which is the common path to the file.
\par 
\par Registry is often used in various auto-starting methods. Here are some known
\par ways:
\par 
\par [HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\\Software\\Microsoft\\Windows\\CurrentVersion\\Run]
\par "Info"="c:\\directory\\Trojan.exe" 
\par [HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\\Software\\Microsoft\\Windows\\CurrentVersion\\RunOnce] 
\par "Info"="c:\\directory\\Trojan.exe"
\par [HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\\Software\\Microsoft\\Windows\\CurrentVersion\\RunServices]
\par "Info"="c:\\directory\\Trojan.exe"
\par [HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\\Software\\Microsoft\\Windows\\CurrentVersion\\RunServicesOnce]
\par "Info="c:\\directory\\Trojan.exe" 
\par [HKEY_CURRENT_USER\\Software\\Microsoft\\Windows\\CurrentVersion\\Run]
\par "Info"="c:\\directory\\Trojan.exe" 
\par [HKEY_CURRENT_USER\\Software\\Microsoft\\Windows\\CurrentVersion\\RunOnce]
\par "Info"="c:\\directory\\Trojan.exe"
\par 
\par - Registry Shell Open
\par 
\par   [HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\\exefile\\shell\\open\\command]
\par   [HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\\SOFTWARE\\Classes\\exefile\\shell\\open\\command]
\par 
\par   A key with the value "%1 %*" should be placed there and if there is some
\par   executable file placed there, it will be executed each time you open a
\par   binary file. It's used like this: trojan.exe "%1 %*"; this would restart
\par   the trojan.
\par 
\par - ICQ Net Detect Method
\par 
\par   [HKEY_CURRENT_USER\\Software\\Mirabilis\\ICQ\\Agent\\Apps\\]
\par 
\par   This key includes all the files that will be executed if ICQ detects Internet
\par   connection. As you can understand,this feature of ICQ is very handy but it's
\par   frequently abused by attackers as well.
\par 
\par - ActiveX Component
\par 
\par   [HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\\Software\\Microsoft\\Active Setup\\Installed Components\\KeyName]
\par   StubPath=C:\\directory\\Trojan.exe
\par 
\par These are the most common Auto-Starting methods using Windows system files, and
\par the Windows registry.
\par 
\par 
\par 4.Trojans Variations
\par   ------------------
\par 
\par There are so many variations out there, it will be hard to list and describe
\par each and every one of them, but most are a combination of all the trojan
\par features you will read about below, or have many other functions still not,
\par and probably will never be known to the public.
\par 
\par Remote Access Trojans
\par 
\par These are probably the most publicly used trojans,just because they give the
\par attackers the power to do more things on the victim's machine than the victim
\par itself, while standing in front of the machine. Most of these trojans are
\par often a combination of the other variations you'll read below. The idea of
\par these trojans is to give the attacker a COMPLETE access to someone's machine,
\par and therefore access to files, private conversations, accounting data, etc.
\par 
\par Password Sending Trojans
\par 
\par The purpose of these trojans is to rip all the cached passwords and also look
\par for other passwords you're entering then send them to a specific mail address,
\par without the user noticing anything. Passwords for ICQ, IRC, FTP, HTTP or any
\par other application that require a user to enter a login+password are being sent
\par back to the attacker's e-mail address, which in most cases is located at some
\par free web based e-mail provider. Most of them do not restart when Windows is
\par loaded, as the idea is to gather as much info about the victim's machine as
\par passwords, mIRC logs, ICQ conversations and mail them; but it depends on the
\par needs of the attacker and the specific situation.
\par 
\par Keyloggers
\par 
\par These trojans are very simple.The only one thing they do is to log the
\par keystrokes of the victim and then let the attacker search for passwords or
\par other sensitive data in the log file. Most of them come with two functions
\par like online and offline recording. Of course they could be configured to
\par send the log file to a specific e-mail address on a daily basis.
\par 
\par Destructive
\par 
\par The only function of these trojans is to destroy and delete files. This makes
\par them very simple and easy to use. They can automatically delete all your core
\par system files (for example: .dll, .ini or .exe files, possibly others) on your
\par machine. The trojan is being activated by the attacker or sometimes works like
\par a logic bomb and starts on a specific day and at specific hour.
\par 
\par Denial Of Service (DoS) Attack Trojans
\par 
\par These trojans are getting very popular these days, giving the attacker power
\par to start DDoS if having enough victims of course. The main idea is that if you
\par have 200 ADSL users infected and start attacking the victim simultaneously,
\par this will generate a LOT of traffic (more then the victim's bandwidth, in most
\par cases) and its the access to the Internet will be shut down. WinTrinoo is a
\par DDoS tool that has become really popular recently, and if the attacker has
\par infected many ADSL users, major Internet sites could be shut down as a result,
\par as we've seen it happen in the past few months.
\par 
\par Another variation of a DoS trojan is the mail-bomb trojan, whose main aim is
\par to infect as many machines as possible and simultaneously attack specific
\par e-mail address/addresses with random subjects and contents which cannot be
\par filtered.
\par 
\par Proxy/Wingate Trojans
\par 
\par Interesting feature implemented in many trojans is turning the victim's
\par computer into a proxy/wingate server available to the whole world or to the
\par attacker only. It's used for anonymous Telnet, ICQ, IRC, etc., and also to
\par register domains with stolen credit cards and for many other illegal
\par activities. This gives the attacker complete anonymity and the chance to do
\par everything from YOUR computer and if he/she gets caught the trace leads back
\par to you.
\par 
\par FTP Trojans
\par 
\par These trojans are probably the most simple ones and are kind of outdated as
\par the only thing they do is to open port 21(the port for FTP transfers) and
\par let EVERYONE connect to your machine or just the attacker. Newer versions
\par are password protected so only the one that infected you may connect to your
\par computer.
\par 
\par Software Detection Killers
\par 
\par There are such functionalities built into some trojans, but there are also
\par separate programs that will kill ZoneAlarm, Norton Anti-Virus and many other
\par (popular anti-virus/firewall) programs, that protect your machine. When they
\par are disabled, the attacker will have full access to your machine, to perform
\par some illegal activity, use your computer to attack others and often disappear.
\par Even though you may notice that these programs are not working or functioning
\par properly, it will take you some time to remove the trojan, install the new
\par software, configure it and get back online with some sense of security.
\par 
\par I would like you to look at a list created by SnakeByte (nice work dude!):
\par 
\par http://www.snake-basket.de/e/AV.txt
\par 
\par Check it out and you will get my point how easily these programs could be
\par disabled. It's a list of Anti-Virus detection software with its Window Names,
\par associated files and many more things that attackers found as a way to disable
\par certain protection software. I've seen only several anti-trojan packages that
\par let the user specify another location of the program (installation) files,
\par different from the default one, also Window names and many other features that
\par will make it harder for the attacker to disable the software.
\par 
\par 
\par 5.The Future Of Windows Trojans
\par   -----------------------------
\par 
\par Windows users will always be targets of malicious attackers because most of
\par them don't know the real meaning of the word security, and think that some
\par firewall is the only solution they need for protection but they actually don't
\par have a clue how it works, or how to configure it properly. Windows Trojans
\par will be a big security problem in the future and I'm sure attackers realise
\par that, and many more unique functions will be implemented into their trojans
\par but will mostly be used for the attacker's private purposes. Programmable or
\par scriptable "automated hacking" functions will be used to solve various
\par attacker's problems starting from anonymous port scanning and going up to
\par Distributed Denial Of Service Attacks(DDoS). A recommended resource related to
\par the subject is
\par 
\par http://staff.washington.edu/dittrich/misc/ddos/
\par 
\par How about distributed cracking of password files like on all of these contests
\par around the world but in that case a network created by attacker/attackers for
\par their own purposes? Has anyone ever thought of "spamming" function, built into
\par trojans, similar to all of these spam programs out there, crawling around the
\par Internet, searching for e-mails? And these are just small examples, but trust
\par me, there are much more advanced features, built into Windows Trojans, that
\par probably will never be released to the public.
\par 
\par At this year's Defcon the security company SensePost made a demonstration with
\par a trojan, called Setiri, bypassing all the firewalls and IDS's giving access
\par to the attacker even the machine was in a restricted environment. More info is
\par available at:
\par 
\par http://www.computercops.biz/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=1321
\par 
\par 
\par 6.How Can I Get Infected?
\par   -----------------------
\par 
\par A lot of people out there can't differ various ways of infection just because
\par in their minds the only way of getting infected is by downloading and running
\par server.exe and they will never do it as they say. As you'll read here, there
\par are many more ways for malicious attackers to infect your machine and start
\par using it for illegal activities. Please take all of these topics I'm reviewing
\par here really seriously; read them carefully and remember that prevention is way
\par better than the cure!
\par 
\par 6.1 ICQ
\par 6.2 IRC
\par 6.3 Attachments
\par 6.4 Physical Access
\par 6.5 Browser And E-mail Software Bugs
\par 6.6 Netbios(FileSharing)
\par 
\par 6.1 Via ICQ
\par 
\par People don't understand that they can also get infected while talking via ICQ
\par or any other Instant Messenger Application. It's all risky when it's about
\par receiving files no matter from who, and no matter from where.
\par 
\par Believe it or not, there are still guys out there, using really old versions
\par of ICQ and it's all because they can see the IP of the person they're talking
\par to. The older versions of ICQ had such functionality and it was useful for
\par everyone capable of using winnuke and other DoS tools, but really how hard it
\par is to click with the mouse? These people are often potential victims of
\par someone that is more knowledgeable on Windows Trojans and takes advantage of
\par their old ICQ versions.
\par 
\par Let's review various ways of getting infected via ICQ:
\par 
\par - You can never be 100% sure who's on the other side of the computer at the
\par   particular moment. It could be someone that hacked your friend's ICQ UIN
\par   (Unique Identification Number)and wants to spread some trojans over his/her
\par   friends. You'll definitely trust your best dude Bob if he offers you
\par   something interesting, but is it really Bob on the other side?
\par 
\par - Old versions of ICQ had bugs in the WebServer feature, that creates a site
\par   on your computer, with your info from the ICQ database. The bug consists in
\par   that the attacker can have access to EVERY file on your machine and if you
\par   read the previous sections carefully and know the auto-start methods, you'll
\par   probably realise what could happen if someone has access to your win.ini or
\par   other system file, namely a trojan installed in a few minutes.
\par 
\par - Trojan.exe is renamed like Trojan....(150 spaces).txt.exe, icon changed to a
\par   real .txt file and this will definitely get you infected. This bug must be
\par   fixed in the newer versions for sure.
\par 
\par No matter which Instant Messenger Application you're using, you could always
\par get yourself infected by certain program bug you never had the chance to hear
\par about, and never took care of checking for newer versions of the application,
\par also when it's about receiving files no matter where, and no matter from who,
\par take that very seriously and realise the dangers of your naivety.
\par 
\par 6.2 Via IRC
\par 
\par So many people LIVE on IRC and this is another place where you can get
\par yourself infected. Trust is vital no matter what you're doing. No matter who
\par is sending you files, pretending to be free porn archive, software for "free
\par internet", hacking Hotmail program, DO NOT get any of these files. Newbies are
\par often targets of these fakes, and believe me, many people are still newbies
\par about their security. Users get infected from porn-trade channels, and, of
\par course, warez channels, as they don't think about the risk, but how to get
\par free porn and free programs instead.
\par 
\par Here are several scenarios of you getting infected while using IRC:
\par 
\par - You're talking with someone, a "girl" probably, have great time and, of
\par   course, you want to see the person you're talking to. You ask for a picture
\par   or the "girl" offers you her pictures and I'm sure you'll definitely want to
\par   see them. The "girl" says that she has just created her first screensaver,
\par   using some known free or commercial software to do this, and offers it to
\par   you, but how about if "she" mentions several pictures are naked ones?! You
\par   have been talking to "her" for a week or so, you get this screensaver.exe,
\par   you run it and, yeah, VERY nice pics, some are naked and she didn't lie to
\par   you so nothing bad or suspicious has happened BUT think again what really
\par   has happened!
\par   
\par - Trojan.exe could also be renamed into Trojan.scr like a screensaver
\par   extension and will again run properly when you execute it so pay attention
\par   about these file extensions.
\par 
\par - Trojan.exe is being renamed like Trojan....(150 spaces).txt.exe you'll get
\par   the file over IRC in the DCC it will appear as .TXT and you won't get
\par   worried about anything, run it and get yourself infected again. In all of
\par   these examples the icon of the file is changed, of course, because it needs
\par   to be the same icon as a normal .TXT and this fools victims very often.
\par 
\par Most people don't notice in their Explorer that the Type of the file is
\par Application BUT with a .TXT icon. So BEFORE you run something, even if it's
\par with a .TXT icon, check its extension and make sure it's really a text file.
\par 
\par 6.3 Via Attachments
\par 
\par I'm always amazed how many people got themselves infected by an attachment,
\par sent into their mailboxes. Most of these users are new to the Internet and are
\par pretty naive. When they receive a mail,containing an attachment, saying they
\par will get free porn, free Internet access etc., they run it without completely
\par understanding the risks for their machines. Check the following scenario: you
\par know your friend Alex is a very skilled Visual Basic programmer. You also know
\par he's coding his latest program but you're curious what it is all about, and
\par you wait for an e-mail from him with the attachment when he finishes coding
\par the application. Yeah, but the person targeting YOU also knows that. The
\par attacker also knows your friend's e-mail address. Then the attacker will
\par simply code some program or get some freeware one, use some relaying mail
\par server to fake the e-mail's FROM field and make it look like your friend's
\par one; Alex's e-mail address is alex@example.com so the attacker's FROM field
\par will be changed to alex@example.com and, of course, it will include the
\par TROJANED attachment... You'll check your mail, see that Alex finally got his
\par program ready and sent it, you'll download and run it without thinking that it
\par might be a trojan or something else, because, hey, Alex wouldn't do something
\par like that to me, he's my friend, and you'll get yourself infected.
\par 
\par Information Is Power! Just because the attacker knew you were waiting for some
\par particular file, he found Alex's e-mail address and got you infected... the
\par right moment assumes importance here. And it all happened just because you
\par were naive, just because you saw alex@example.com in the FROM field, and just
\par because you didn't check the mail headers to see that the mail came from some
\par .jp mail server relaying e-mails and, has been used from spammers for several
\par months.
\par 
\par Many people got themselves infected by the famous "Microsoft Internet Explorer
\par Update" sent directly to their mailboxes, by the nonexistent Microsoft Updates
\par Staff. I understand you felt great because Microsoft are paying attention
\par especially to you, and sent you the latest updates, but these "updates" are
\par definitely trojans. Microsoft will NEVER send you updates of their software
\par via e-mail no matter you see the FROM field is updates@microsoft.com and as
\par you've noticed in the previous example the FROM field could and IS faked. If
\par you ever notice some mail in your mailbox with subjects like "Microsoft IE
\par Update" and such, delete WITHOUT viewing or reading the e-mail, because some
\par E-Mail clients like Outlook Express and others, have bugs that automatically
\par execute the file being attached in the e-mail WITHOUT you even touching it. As
\par you can imagine this is a extremely dangerous problem that requires you to be
\par always up to date with the latest version of any software you're using.
\par 
\par 6.4 Physical Access
\par 
\par Physical access is vital for your computer's security. Imagine what can an
\par attacker do while having physical access on your machine, and let's not
\par mention if you're always connected to the Internet and leave the room for
\par several minutes... long enough to get you infected. Here I'll point you
\par several scenarios, often used by attackers to infect your computer while
\par they're having physical access to your machine. There are some very smart
\par people out there that keep thinking of new ways of getting physical access
\par to someone's computer. Here are some tricks that are interesting:
\par 
\par - Your "friend" wants to infect you with a trojan and he/she has physical
\par   access to your machine. Let's say you were at home surfing the net,
\par   chatting or whatever. Suddenly your "friend" asks you for a glass of
\par   water, knowing that you'll go in another room and will be away for 1 or
\par   2 minutes. While you do that he/she takes out a diskette of the pocket
\par   and infects your unprotected PC. You came back and everything is OK
\par   because your "friend" is doing exactly the same thing before you left
\par   ...surfing the net.
\par 
\par - The next example is when 2 guys want to take revenge on you cause of
\par   something and are supporting each other to accomplish the task. Again you
\par   are at home with your "friend", surfing, chatting, whatever you're doing;
\par   suddenly the telephone rings and a "friend" of yours wants to speak with
\par   you for something that is really important. He/she (it's better to be she
\par   in this case) asks "Is there anyone around you? If so,please move somewhere
\par   away from him/her(after knowing it is him or her,of course). I don't want
\par   anyone to listen what I'm going to tell you". The victim is again lured away
\par   from the computer, leaving the attacker to do whatever he/she wants on the
\par   target computer.
\par 
\par - Other approaches like the previous ones might be sudden ring on the bell, as
\par   well as other variations of phone calls and conversations leaving the
\par   attacker alone with the victim's computer. There are so many other possible
\par   approaches; just think for a while and you'll see what I mean and how easily
\par   you could be tricked, and it's because you're not suspicious enough when it
\par   is about your sensitive computer data.
\par 
\par - Another way of infecting while having physical access is the Auto-Starting
\par   CD function. You've probably noticed that when you place a CD in your CDROM,
\par   it automatically starts with some setup interface; here's an example of the
\par   Autorun.inf file that is placed on such CD's:
\par 
\par   [autorun]
\par   open=setup.exe
\par   icon=setup.exe
\par 
\par   So you can imagine that while running the real setup program a trojan could
\par   be run VERY easily, and as most of you probably don't know about this CD
\par   function they will get infected and won't understand what happened and how
\par   it's been done. Yeah, I know it's convenient to have the setup.exe autostart
\par   but security is what really matters here, that's why you should turn off the
\par   Auto-Start functionality by doing the following:
\par   
\par   Start Button->Settings->Control Panel->
\par                                  System->
\par                                  Device Manager->CDROM->Properties->Settings
\par                                  
\par   and there you'll see a reference to Auto Insert Notification. Turn it off
\par   and you won't have any problems with that function anymore.
\par 
\par I know MANY other variations of physical access infections but these are the
\par most common ones so pay attention and try to make up several more by yourself.
\par 
\par When the victim IS connected to the Internet:
\par 
\par Here we have many variations; again, I'll mention the most common ones. While
\par the attacker is having physical access he/she may download the trojan.exe, 
\par using various ways just by knowing how various Internet protocols work.
\par 
\par - A special IRCbot known only to the attacker is staying in IRC with the only
\par   function to DCC the trojan.exe back to the attacker whenever he/she messages
\par   the bot with a special command. The victim will probably be away from the
\par   computer.
\par - The attacker wants to download some specific software like new version of
\par   some programs infected with trojan(s), of course, and visit some URL, known
\par   to him/her only, and download the trojan.
\par - The attacker pretends he/she wants to check his/her (web based) mail (for
\par   example, at Yahoo! or HotMail) but in fact has the trojan.exe stored in his/
\par   her mailbox and just downloads and executes the file, hereby infecting the
\par   computer. The mail service is used as a storage area, in this case.
\par 
\par There are many more ways of infecting the victim while connected to the Net,
\par as you can imagine. Any of these examples will succeed but it all depends on
\par the victim's knowledge of the Internet and how advanced his/her skills are,
\par so the attacker needs to check these things somehow before doing any of these
\par activities I pointed here. After that, the attacker will be able to choose
\par the best variant for infecting the victim and doing the job.
\par 
\par 6.5 Browser And E-mail Software Bugs
\par 
\par Users do not update their software versions as often as they should be, and a
\par lot of the attackers are taking advantage of this well known fact. Imagine you
\par are using an old version of Internet Explorer and you visit a (malicious) site
\par that will check and automatically infect your machine without you downloading
\par or executing any programs. The same scenario goes when you check your E-mail
\par with Outlook Express or some other software with well known problems, again
\par you will be infected without downloading the attachment. Make sure you always
\par have the latest version of your Browser and E-mail Software, and reduce the
\par ways of these variations to minimum. Here are some links about Browser and
\par E-mail Software bugs, check them out and understand how dangerous these bugs
\par are, and it's all because of you using an old version of the software.
\par 
\par http://www.guninski.com/browsers.html
\par http://www.guninski.com/netscape.html
\par 
\par 6.6 Netbios(File Sharing)
\par 
\par If port 139 on your machine is opened,you're probably sharing files and this
\par is another way for someone to access your machine, install trojan.exe and
\par modify some system file, so it will run the next time you restart your PC.
\par Sometimes the attacker may use DoS(Denial Of Service Attack) to shut down
\par your machine and force you to reboot, so the trojan can restart itself
\par immediately. To block file sharing in WinME version, go to:
\par 
\par Start->Settings->Control Panel->Network->File And Print Sharing
\par 
\par and uncheck the boxes there. That way you won't have any problems related to
\par Netbios abuse.
\par 
\par 
\par 7.Fake Programs
\par   -------------
\par 
\par Imagine a Freeware SimpleMail program that's very suitable for your needs, and
\par very handy with its features like address book, option to check several POP3
\par accounts and many other functions that make it even better then your E-mail
\par client and the best thing for you is that it's free. You use ZoneAlarm or any
\par other similar protection software, and mark the program as a TRUSTED Internet
\par server so none of your programs will ever bother you about that program as you
\par are using it probably every day because it's working very well, no problems
\par ever occurred, you're happy, but a lot of things are going in the background.
\par Every mail you send and all your passwords for the POP3 accounts are being
\par mailed directly into the attacker's mailbox without you noticing anything.
\par Cached passwords and your keystrokes could be also mailed and the idea here is
\par to gather as much info as possible and send it to the attacker. This info
\par includes credit card numbers, passwords for various applications and many
\par other things.
\par 
\par In some cases the attacker may have complete access to your machine but it
\par depends on his/her ideas about the hidden program's functions. When sending
\par e-mails and using port 25 or 110 for POP3, these could be used for connections
\par from the attacker's machine (not at home, of course, but again from another
\par hacked one) to connect and use the hidden functions he/she implemented in the
\par Freeware SimpleMail. The attacker's idea here is to offer you a program that
\par requires a connection to be established with some server; let's say at the top
\par of the SimpleMail there's a banner that's auto-refreshing every few minutes,
\par because the programmer "needs to pay the bills too" as he said in the About
\par section, so nothing seems suspicious to you as it's a normal thing, and your
\par logical conclusion is completely right as the only way for that guy to keep
\par offering this cool freeware program for free is to use banners. You've already
\par marked the program as TRUSTED so the attacker can have complete access to your
\par machine because he/she fooled you into thinking it's a TRUSTED program. Even
\par if you notice some connection to your machine on some strange port, you won't
\par consider this as a suspicions event, as the banners section needs to get these
\par banners from somewhere, and this is the place your machine is connected all
\par the time to keep them refreshing.
\par 
\par The only thing the attacker needs is creativity, and most of them do have it.
\par Think of a fake AudioGalaxy (software for mp3's sharing) but, of course, with
\par a different name. The attacker would create it, will free 15GB disk space on
\par his machine and place a large archive of mp3's...then, of course, the same
\par will be done on several other machines to fool you that you are downloading
\par from other people located all over the world, but it's not necessary as the
\par program's interface may never show you where you're actually downloading the
\par mp3's from. The software will again be backdoored as in the previous example,
\par and will get thousands of naive users, probably using ADSL connections,
\par infected.
\par 
\par Fake programs that have hidden functions, often have professional looking web
\par sites, links to various anti-trojan software mentioned as affiliates, and make
\par you trust the site; readme.txt is included in the setup and many other things
\par to fool you it's a trusted one. Pay attention to freeware tools you download,
\par consider them extremely dangerous and a very useful and easy way for attackers
\par to infect your machine with a Trojan.
\par 
\par 8.Untrusted Sites And Freeware Software
\par   -------------------------------------
\par 
\par A site located at some free web space provider or just offering some programs
\par for illegal activities can be considered as untrusted one. As you know, there
\par are thousands of "hacking/security" archives on these free web space providers
\par like Xoom, Tripod, Geocities and many many others. These sites have archives
\par full with "hacking" programs, scanners, mail-bombers, flooders and many other
\par tools. Often several, if not all of these programs are infected by the guy who
\par created the site. It's highly risky to download any of the programs and the
\par tools located on such untrusted sites; no matter which software you use are,
\par you ready to take the risk? There are some untrusted sites, looking REALLY
\par professional and having huge archives, full with Internet related software,
\par feedback form, links to other popular sites. I think if you take some time,
\par look deeper, scan all the files you download you can decide on your own
\par whether the site you are downloading your software from is a trusted or an
\par untrusted one.
\par 
\par Software like mIRC, ICQ, PGP or any other popular software MUST be downloaded
\par from its original (or official dedicated mirror site) and not from any of
\par these I told you about. Sometimes such sites claim there's a new version of,
\par let's say, mIRC 7.0, and you know your current version is 6.0 and, yeah, it's
\par handy to click on the URL and download the .exe in 1 minute and take advantage
\par of the latest version, but will definitely get yourself infected. A possible
\par variation of this method will again be claiming for a new version, BUT the
\par site would include info on nonexistent security bugs, found in the previous
\par one (which is of course the latest you have), and again it is handy for you to
\par download it, instead of visiting mIRC's main site, and see if there is really
\par an updated version or check for any of these security bugs you've read about
\par on the fake site.
\par 
\par Webmasters of well known Security Portals, that have HUGE archive with various
\par "hacking" programs, should be responsible for the files they provide and OFTEN
\par scan them with Anti-Virus and Anti-Trojan software to guarantee their visitors
\par download "free of trojans and viruses". A known method is that attackers send
\par some program created by them, let's say a UDP flooder, to the webmaster like a
\par submission for the archive, but infect the program with some trojan and later
\par have visitors downloading the program and getting themselves infected. Some
\par attackers may use the webmaster's irresponsibility and infect their files, and
\par have the site distribute the trojan. I know of another story regarding this
\par problem. It's about a Gaming Magazine that used to include a CD with free demo
\par versions of the latest games in each new edition. The editors made a contest
\par to find new talents and give the people programming games the chance to
\par popularise their productions by sending them to the Editors. An attacker
\par infected his game with a new and private trojan and sent it to the Magazine.
\par In the next edition the "game" appeared on the CD and you can imagine the
\par chaos that set in. And it's all because of the Editors, having not so much
\par knowledge on the topic and as I've told you, in the old days Anti-Virus
\par software were detecting only a small part of the public trojans (and what
\par about all the private ones). In this particular case they were using only an
\par Anti Virus scanner to protect their readers from such attacks. Webmasters and
\par everyone having some sort of software archive on his/her portal, MUST scan it
\par very often, and before adding a new file it should be well examined; if it's
\par suspicious in any way, it must be sent to your software detection labs for
\par further analysis. Do care about your visitors/readers if you want them to care
\par about you.
\par 
\par Freeware programs could be considered suspicious and extremely dangerous, due
\par to the fact that it's a very easy and useful way for the attacker to infect
\par your machine with some freeware program. No matter how suitable you find the
\par program, remember that "free is not always the best" and it's very risky to
\par use any of these programs. My advice is: before using Freeware program, do
\par search for some reviews on it, check popular search engines, and try to look
\par up for some info about it. If you find any reviews written by respected sites,
\par that means they've used and tested it and the chance of infection is hereby,
\par minimised. If no reviews or comments about the software are found via the
\par search engines, then it may be highly risky to start using it.
\par 
\par 
\par 9.How Are They Detecting My Internet Presence?
\par   --------------------------------------------
\par 
\par People new to the Internet often ask this question as they can't understand
\par why someone will want to attack especially them, because they never did any
\par harm to anyone and never did something that might get them into trouble.
\par While reading the previous sections, I hope you understood that sometimes
\par you only need to visit a web site with your unpatched browser and get yourself
\par infected.
\par 
\par I will explain several scenarios on how attackers may discover your Internet
\par presence:
\par  
\par - When visiting a web page,the attacker might have created a script that will
\par   automatically check your Browser for known bugs, and if any are detected,
\par   install a trojan on your machine or notify the attacker to have a deeper
\par   look. Make sure you're always using the latest version of your Browser for
\par   maximal protection. Check for (security) patches and apply these often!
\par - When joining an IRC channel, an IRC bot might be configured to scan everyone
\par   joining for specific trojan ports opened or FileSharing (Netbios) enabled.
\par   If the attacker is smart, the script will scan you several minutes after you
\par   join the channel and, of course, use an IP number not belonging to anyone in
\par   the channel.
\par - Attackers often attempt IP blocks scanning, looking default trojan ports and
\par   of course FileSharing(Netbios). After infection, your machine could also be
\par   used for such scans, as well as an IRC bot, scanning those joining some big
\par   and full with people IRC channel.
\par 
\par These are some of the most common ways attackers use to search for new victims,
\par suitable for their illegal activities. If someone is targeting especially you,
\par the attacker won't be using any of these methods I reviewed above; instead your
\par Browser version will be found as well as the Operation System you're using, and
\par the attacker will make a personal contact with you via IRC, ICQ, etc., and fool
\par you somehow and get you infected.
\par 
\par 
\par 10.What Is The Attacker Looking For?
\par    ---------------------------------
\par 
\par Some of you may think that trojans are used for damages only. Well, they can
\par also be used for spying on someone's machine and taking a lot of private and
\par sensitive information (industrial espionage). The attacker's interests would
\par include but are not limited to the following:
\par 
\par - Credit Card Information (often used for domain registration, shopping with
\par   your credit card)
\par - Any accounting data (E-mail passwords, Dial-Up passwords, WebServices
\par   passwords, etc.)
\par - Email Addresses (Might be used for spamming, as explained above)
\par - Work Projects (Steal your presentations and work related papers)
\par - Children's names/pictures, Ages (pedophile attacker?!)
\par - School work (steal your papers and publish them with his/her name on it)
\par 
\par I'll mention again several scenarios about the attacker's mode of thinking:
\par 
\par - Once infected, your computer might be used as a Warez Archive. No matter how
\par   much or little free disk space you have, you'll probably have enough for the
\par   attacker's needs. He/she won't use all of your bandwidth; there will be some
\par   limit for connections to your computer, so you'll still be able to do your
\par   work without knowing that your computer is used as a pirated software FTP
\par   Server and it is known to people worldwide who keep downloading software
\par   from YOU.
\par - Kiddie-Porn traders will also use your computer for storing their archives
\par   and again turning your machine into a well known place for traders of nasty
\par   and above all illegal pictures. You'll again do your work and have no clue
\par   there are illegal activities going in your computer.
\par - The attacker might just want to have fun with you, open/close the CD tray,
\par   play with your mouse, annoy you somehow; that's stupid and useless but a lot
\par   of people do it.
\par - Your computer might be used for other illegal purposes like the attacker's
\par   usage of your IP address to hack, scan, flood, infiltrate other machines on
\par   the Internet; so the victims will see your machine is doing it, and this
\par   will definitely get you in trouble.
\par 
\par 11.Intelligence With Trojans
\par    -------------------------
\par 
\par Think for a while about how much your life depends on your computer, your ICQ,
\par your chat program, your e-mail address and think how vulnerable your life is
\par just because you're infected with a Trojan Horse. They can, and they have been
\par used for intelligence for a very long time. Just by reading your e-mails,
\par keeping track of your contacts, reading your private conversations, the web
\par sites you visit, ICQ history, mIRC log files with your private conversations
\par and a log of everything you do online, a psychological profile could be
\par created in several hours (depends of the skills of course) and your life, mode
\par of thinking, reactions on specific future situations and needs will be
\par revealed to some geek, wanting to recruit and/or manipulate you. This is food
\par for thought and another topic, but just think how a combination of psychology,
\par social engineering and computer security knowledge makes you a really powerful
\par guy. And remember that people reveal their REAL personalities, wishes, mode of
\par thinking, interests only when they think nobody is watching them...
\par 
\par 
\par 12.Trojan Ports
\par    ------------
\par 
\par Trojans use specific ports to communicate with the client. In the old days the
\par well known trojan ports were mostly used, but today it's possible to change
\par the port every time the trojan is restarted. Here is a link to the best and
\par probably including all of the public trojans Ports List I've come across.
\par 
\par http://www.simovits.com/trojans/trojans.html
\par 
\par 
\par 13.How Do I Know I'm Infected?
\par    ---------------------------
\par 
\par Sometimes you think it's normal Windows behaviour when there are 500 MB or so
\par missing on your HDD, because some software is using it, or you have installed
\par a game you forgot about and many other reasons but not the real one. Here are
\par some things which are very suspicious, and no matter how much your Anti-Virus
\par software tells you that you aren't infected, dig a little deeper and see what
\par really happened. One thing that will help you is to know the main features of
\par the public trojans, so you'll be able to react if you notice such activity on
\par your PC. I have included links to various Trojan Databases that you should
\par visit if you want to know the main features of the public ones.
\par 
\par - Its normal to visit a web site and several more pop-ups to appear with the
\par   one you've visited. But when you do completely nothing and suddenly your
\par   browser directs you to some page unknown to you, take that serious. 
\par   
\par - A strange and unknown Windows Message Box appears on your screen, asking
\par   you some personal questions. 
\par   
\par - Your Windows settings change by themselves like a new screensaver text,
\par   date/time, sound volume changes by itself, your mouse moves by itself,
\par   CD-ROM drawer opens and closes.
\par 
\par Please note that most advanced attackers will just spy on you and use your
\par infected machine for some specific reason, and not perform any of the above
\par "tricks" so as not to cause any suspicious activity on the target system (as
\par this would probably mean they could get easily detected). Someone that just
\par wants to have fun with you is more likely to perform these actions.
\par 
\par 14.Anti-Virus (AV) Scanners
\par    -------------------
\par 
\par In the old days Virus Scanners used to detect only viruses and just a small
\par part of the public trojans on the Internet. Realising how dangerous and
\par popular Trojans are becoming today most, if not all of these scanners detect
\par probably all of the public ones out there. As always people, think they are
\par safe and secure when using Virus Scanner but it's a false sense of security.
\par This type of software relies mainly on "signatures" of each trojan's server
\par executable and also its common auto-starting methods, but that is not the
\par perfect solution by far for protection yourself against trojans, as they use
\par many other methods to hide inside the machine, most of which are undetected
\par by Anti-Virus Software. When trojans became a big security breach, specific
\par Anti-Trojan packages were released to the public and it was necessary for the
\par AVs to start detecting not only viruses, but also trojans if they wanted new
\par users. As a result, most of them became really advanced trojan scanning and
\par detection systems, but for your maximal protection it's recommended to use
\par both Anti-Virus and Anti-Trojans software.
\par 
\par Public trojans appear online almost every day and the detection software is
\par updated every day for maximal protection of its customers. One very big
\par problem is that the users do not update their signature files as often as they
\par should be, thus having detection software that's not detecting several more
\par trojans or viruses. Users MUST update their software's signature files every
\par day, and it will take them only several minutes. Each and every time a new
\par file is downloaded, it MUST be scanned BEFORE being opened with Anti-Virus and
\par Anti-Trojan software. If you think the file is suspicious due to some reasons,
\par do NOT run it, but send it to your detection software labs for analysis.
\par 
\par 
\par 15.Anti-Trojan Software
\par    --------------------
\par 
\par Here are reviews of the most popular Anti-Trojan packages. The list also
\par includes various applications (freeware) to help you monitor your computer for
\par ongoing Trojan activities. I suggest you visit the site of every product and
\par decide which one best fits to your needs. Check the links section at the end
\par of the paper to see various sites, providing reviews of the software below.
\par 
\par -- TDS-3 --
\par 
\par Trojan Defence Suite (TDS) is a indispensable, must-have software package for
\par protection against trojans. It has many unique functions never seen in other
\par Anti-Trojan packages. The program has really advanced features and if you're a
\par newbie, it will probably take some time before you are able to use the software
\par at its full capacity (read the excellent help files).
\par 
\par You can get TDS from http://tds.diamondcs.com.au/
\par 
\par -- LockDown2000 --
\par 
\par This is really good Anti-Trojan package that detects a LOT of trojans and other
\par known as "hacking tools" programs. It will help you monitor your system files
\par for changes, processes and registry modification. More info at its home page.
\par 
\par You can get LockDown2000 from http://www.lockdown2000.com
\par 
\par -- TFAK5 --
\par 
\par Trojans First Aid Kit is a trojan-scanner developed by SnakeByte. It has many
\par other unique features; it could be used as a Client for various public trojans
\par as well.
\par 
\par Download TFAK5 from http://www.snake-basket.de/tfak/TFAK5.zip
\par 
\par -- Trojan Remover --
\par 
\par Anti-Trojan software detecting 5468 trojans/worms (including variants) as at
\par 15th August 2002. Systems files and registry monitoring functions are also
\par implemented. More info at its home page:
\par 
\par http://www.simplysup.com/tremover/details.html
\par  
\par -- Pest Patrol --
\par 
\par A tool that scans for trojans as well as programs known as "hacking tools" and
\par spyware. More info at its official page:
\par 
\par http://www.safersite.com/ 
\par 
\par -- Anti-Trojan 5.5 --
\par 
\par Trojans detection package that is able to remove most of the public trojans out
\par there. More info at its official page:
\par 
\par http://www.anti-trojan.net
\par 
\par -- Tauscan  --
\par 
\par Trojan scanner that has unique features and is a must have. It's also able to
\par detect new and never released to the public trojans. More info at its official
\par page:
\par 
\par http://www.agnitum.com/products/tauscan/
\par 
\par -- The Cleaner --
\par 
\par Very popular Anti-Trojan software, known by everyone. Check its home page at:
\par 
\par http://www.moosoft.com/
\par 
\par -- PC Door Guard --
\par 
\par Trojan detection software, detecting a lot of trojans, and a monitor of files
\par and directories is also included. More info at:
\par 
\par http://www.trojanclinic.com/pdg.html
\par 
\par -- Trojan Hunter --
\par 
\par Trojan detection package with a lot of functions. It's very handy.
\par 
\par More info at http://www.mischel.dhs.org/trojanhunter.jsp
\par 
\par -- LogMonitor --
\par 
\par Log Monitor is a file and directory monitoring tool. The program periodically
\par checks a selected file's modification time and executes an external program if
\par file's time was changed or not changed. For directories it handles such events
\par as files change, addition or removal. I recommend this tool as it's vary handy
\par and will help you a lot.
\par 
\par Home page: http://logmon.bitrix.ru/logmon/eng/
\par 
\par -- PrcView --
\par 
\par PrcView is a freeware process viewer utility that shows detailed information
\par about running processes. This information includes such details as the create
\par date/time, the version and full path for each DLL used by a selected process,
\par a list of all threads, memory blocks and heaps. PrcView also allows you to
\par kill and attach a debugger to a selected process. PrcView runs on both Windows
\par 95/98 and Windows NT platforms and includes Windows and command-line versions
\par of the program.
\par 
\par Get PrcView from http://www.xmlsp.com/pview/prcview.htm
\par 
\par -- XNetStat --
\par 
\par GUI based netstat tool for Windows. It will help you monitor you machine for
\par open ports. Download it from:
\par 
\par http://packetstormsecurity.org/Win/netstat.zip
\par 
\par -- ConSeal PC FIREWALL --
\par 
\par A really good firewall for advanced users using Windows having basic knowledge
\par of TCP/IP and other protocols; this software will help you to secure your PC a
\par lot. It has some major advantages over other Win based firewalls. For the full
\par range of specifications, check its official web page at:
\par 
\par http://www.consealfirewall.com/
\par 
\par 
\par 16.After You Clean Yourself
\par    ------------------------
\par 
\par Your machine has been compromised and probably a lot of sensitive data stolen,
\par files have been modified and illegal activities have been preformed on your
\par computer. Here I'll give you recommendations about what to do after you are
\par 100% clean of trojans.
\par 
\par - Accounting Data such as ISP passwords, ICQ, mIRC, FTP, web site passwords,
\par   e-mail address passwords are definitely known to the attacker. Contact your
\par   ISP about changing your dial-up password if you're using such connection.
\par   Immediately change your ICQ, mIRC passwords of course if they're still the
\par   same. (Often attackers won't change any of your accounting data to fool you
\par   everything is OK so there is a big chance you will still be able to recover
\par   from the compromise). Change your web based e-mail passwords and do check
\par   your information stored there, as password retrieval services for various
\par   e-mail providers such as Yahoo and Hotmail use this info combined with a
\par   "Secret Question" for password retrieval. Attackers often change the info,
\par   the answer to the secret question and many other things that will get them
\par   easily back into your mailbox, whether you've changed your pass or not.
\par 
\par - If you're taking advantage of the handy Address Book feature in your e-mail
\par   service, and have a list full of e-mails of friends, colleagues, etc. there
\par   is a real possibility that the attacker has sent them a trojan and possibly
\par   infected them too. Mail all of these people and ask them about receiving any
\par   files from your mailbox, inform them someone else might know your e-mail
\par   password so they'll be able to take appropriate actions like checking their
\par   machines for Trojans. Do the same with the people from your ICQ contact list
\par   as they might be targeted too.
\par 
\par - Check your HDD for abnormal activities like a lot of free space missing etc.
\par   Search for warez software and, as I mentioned, kiddie-porn archives.
\par 
\par - Think for a while about the sensitive information you had on your machine
\par   before the compromise, and if you are absolutely sure the attacker may know
\par   it too, then take appropriate action, like informing the any institutions
\par   the sensitive data belong to.
\par 
\par - Scan your machine with Anti-Virus scanner, as the attacker could have placed
\par   some virus or infected macro documents on your machine to do destructive
\par   things even there's no access for him/her to your machine.
\par 
\par - Monitor your processes BEFORE and AFTER connecting to the Internet, as some
\par   trojans start when they detect Internet connection. Don't get fooled again,
\par   be very suspicious.
\par 
\par 
\par 17.Online Scanning Services
\par    ------------------------
\par 
\par These services are very popular these days and they are very handy for users
\par who haven't got much knowledge on all of the holes they're checking for, but
\par wanting to ensure they are protected from all of them. This section is placed
\par at the end of the paper with a specific reason. If you have read the paper,
\par you should know a LOT about trojans by now, their principles of working and
\par detection techniques, therefore you can decide whether these online scanners
\par are useful or if they give a false sense of safety.
\par 
\par There are several types of Online Scanners: Trojan Scanner, Port Scanner and
\par Bugs Checker.
\par 
\par - Trojan Scanner
\par   It's using a list with predefined ports, associated with the name of the
\par   trojan responding to its default port, like Girl Friend=21544, and if this
\par   port is in "listening" state on your machine it will inform you that you've
\par   been infected with the GirlFriend Trojan. As you already know, trojans have
\par   functions like changing their default port to ANY of the attacker's choice.
\par   That makes these Trojan Scanners kind of useless, because serious attackers
\par   do change the default port for sure.
\par 
\par - Port Scanner
\par   This service has two options like well-known ports scan and all ports scan.
\par   The first feature is scanning for well known ports, again associated with
\par   the appropriate service related to the port like port 21-FTP, 23-Telnet,
\par   25-SMTP. The second feature is rarely seen on a free one, because of the
\par   bandwidth it would generate to scan all of the 65,535 ports. It will again
\par   associate ports with services like I mentioned above, and if it finds any
\par   unknown ports not associated with any service, it will also report it, like
\par   Port 34525 State:Listening, which means this port is waiting for connections
\par   from the outside.
\par 
\par - Bugs Checker
\par   Its purpose is to check your Browser or your E-mail Software for well known
\par   bugs and security related problems. If any are detected, it will point you
\par   to a site containing the patches for these bugs or a site with the latest
\par   updated versions of the software.
\par 
\par It's strongly recommended to close any other Internet related application on
\par your machine before being scanned by Online Trojan Scanner and Port Scanner.
\par You decide which service is best for you, which one will be able to detect
\par trojan infections on your machine, and which won't; you now know the main
\par principles and the answers too, I hope. Links to several online scanning
\par services I know of are included in the Links Section.
\par 
\par 18.Advice
\par    ------
\par 
\par This is a very useful section, full of tips and advice on how to protect
\par yourself from trojans using various ways you've already read about, but
\par summarised here for faster reading and hopefully better understanding.
\par 
\par [01] Never accept a file even it is from some friend. You're never sure who's
\par      on the other side of the computer at the moment. If you really need this
\par      file, let's say some presentation or a work paper, find other ways, like
\par      the phone, and verify the file is from your friend. Yeah it will take you
\par      some time and slow you a bit, but be paranoid about attachments you may
\par      receive and don't get infected.
\par     
\par [02] When executing files, first check their type. Is it really a .doc or it's
\par      some executable with a .doc icon.
\par 
\par [03] Update your Anti-Virus and Anti-Trojan package signature files regularly,
\par      if possible EVERY day for maximal protection, as new trojans and viruses
\par      are discovered every day. Most of the detection software have functions
\par      like scheduling scans so if you are away from your machine during the
\par      night but you leave it switched on, why not consider to schedule a scan
\par      and update every night? Doing so will ensure your maximal protection.
\par 
\par [04] Make sure you always have the latest version of the software you're using
\par      as new bugs appear very often and programs are regularly updated. Check
\par      often to see if there are bugs and/or other problems found in software
\par      that may potentially expose your system to risk - and patch/update your
\par      system(s) accordingly. Some software have an option to check for the
\par      latest version of the software from the vendor web site; make use of it.
\par 
\par [05] Take several minutes and regularly check the processes on your machine
\par      with the software I reviewed above. You'll be surprised what you may
\par      detect sometimes.
\par 
\par [06] It's vital to understand the risk of getting software from someone you
\par      just met, or had only several ICQ, IRC conversations with.
\par 
\par [07] Consider freeware programs as very risky software to download, and try
\par      searching for some reviews of the program before running it.
\par 
\par [08] Carefully read the help files coming with your detection software to be
\par      able to use them to their full capacity.
\par 
\par [09] Download software ONLY from its official page(s) or dedicated mirror web
\par      site. Never get the latest version of mIRC or ICQ from some site you've
\par      never heard about like from some free web space provider like Geocities.
\par      Consider it as an untrusted site and do NOT download anything from there.
\par 
\par [10] If you are playing with trojans you can also get infected as there are
\par      trojans or other software that are already infected and is waiting for
\par      someone with not so much knowledge on the topic to download and use it.
\par 
\par [11] Don't be so naive on everything you see on the Internet or what various
\par      sites offer you - don't download some software you've never heard about.
\par 
\par 19.Links Section
\par    -------------
\par 
\par This section will be very useful for everyone interested in reading various
\par papers about trojans written by other people, anti-trojan software reviews
\par sites, trojans archives, trojan protection portals and many other sites
\par related to the topic. If you want me to add your link in the next update mail
\par me and if the site is somehow related to the topic, I will definately include
\par it in the list.
\par 
\par Please don't forget that you can find these and many other security related
\par links at our extensive web links directory at Frame4 Security Systems; check
\par it out at: http://www.frame4.com/php/modules.php?name=Web_Links
\par 
\par -- Trojan Portals and Archives --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.tlsecurity.net
\par DESC : Excellent, well-known security portal providing many trojan resources
\par        and information regarding the topic
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.euyulio.org
\par DESC : Security portal, huge trojans archive and other unique features
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.megasecurity.org/
\par DESC : Megasecurity portal having huge trojans archive and well sorted library
\par        on the subject
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.trojan.ch
\par DESC : Trojans portal, news, archive, unique programs
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.trojanforge.net/
\par DESC : Trojans portal, trojans archive, documents, www-board
\par 
\par URL  : http://packetstormsecurity.org/trojans
\par DESC : Packetstorm's trojans section
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.pcflank.com
\par DESC : Security portal providing various functions as browser tests, remote
\par        trojan scanning
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.staff.uiuc.edu/~ehowes/trojans/tr-tests.htm
\par DESC : Site showing results of actual (functional comparison) tests performed
\par        with various trojan detection programs
\par 
\par -- Trojan Database Libraries --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.simovits.com/trojans/trojans.html
\par DESC : Huge, detailed and well sorted list of trojans and their functions
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.tlsecurity.net/tlfaq.htm
\par DESC : Comprehensive list and analysis of probably all the public trojans
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.blackcode.com/trojans/
\par DESC : Trojans/worms library database provided by BlackCode
\par 
\par -- Anti Trojan Sites --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.hackfix.org/
\par DESC : Site with resources related to trojan protection and helping newbies
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.nohack.net/
\par DESC : The nohack project helps newbies clean their PCs and protect themselves
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.virushelp.info
\par DESC : IRC channel related to virus and trojans protection
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.anti-trojan.org 
\par DESC : Anti-trojan help site
\par 
\par -- Detection Software Reviews --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.wilders.org/anti_trojans.htm
\par DESC : Site providing reviews of anti-trojan software
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.rokopsecurity.de/
\par DESC : German site providing reviews of various anti-virus and anti-trojan
\par        software, and many other information (site language is German)
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.fruitloop.net/virushelp/index.html
\par DESC : Site providing reviews of detection software
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.firewallguide.com/anti-trojan.htm
\par DESC : Site providing various security related services and reviews
\par 
\par -- Papers Regarding Windows Trojans --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.jmu.edu/computing/info-security/engineering/issues/remote.shtml
\par DESC : Interesting paper about windows trojans
\par 
\par URL  : http://members.ozemail.com.au/~netsafe/trojan_index.html
\par DESC : Detailed information about windows trojans
\par 
\par URL  : http://researchweb.watson.ibm.com/antivirus/SciPapers/Whalley/inwVB99.html
\par DESC : Windows trojans
\par 
\par URL  : http://researchweb.watson.ibm.com/antivirus/SciPapers/Smoke/smoke.html
\par DESC : Another must read paper
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.frame4.com/content/files/the_gentle_art_of_trojan_horsing_under_windows.txt
\par DESC : Windows trojans
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.frame4.com/content/files/trojdetecte.txt
\par DESC : Snakebyte's tips about trojan detection
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.frame4.com/content/files/what_trojan.pdf
\par DESC : Paper about windows trojans
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.frame4.com/content/files/Trojan_reversing.txt
\par DESC : Interesting reading
\par 
\par -- Online Scanners --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.hackerwhacker.com/
\par DESC : A must visit vulnerability checker with unique features
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.scannerx.com
\par DESC : Vulnerability assessment scanner
\par 
\par URL  : http://scan.sygatetech.com/
\par DESC : Security scanner
\par 
\par -- Browser and E-mail Software --
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.nwnetworks.com/iesc.html 
\par DESC : Internet Explorer security centre
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.guninski.com
\par DESC : Browser and active content researcher a must visit
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.sophos.com/virusinfo/whitepapers/activecontent.html
\par DESC : Whitepaper about active content security
\par 
\par }{\lang1043\langfe1033\langnp1043\insrsid5836027\charrsid16190392 -- Misc --
\par 
\par URL  : http://directory.google.com/Top/Computers/Security/Anti_Virus/Trojans/
\par }{\insrsid5836027\charrsid13051012 DESC : Google's trojans directory
\par 
\par URL  : http://support.microsoft.com/support/kb/articles/q262/6/31.asp?LN=EN-US&SD=gn&FR=0
\par DESC : Risky file extensions
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.frame4.com/content/files/razor.wintrinoo.txt
\par DESC : Review of the WinTrinoo trojan
\par 
\par URL  : http://www.megasecurity.org/Info/mIRC.txt
\par DESC : Very detailed paper on mIRC backdoors
\par 
\par 20.Final Words
\par    -----------
\par 
\par I really hope you've realised how big security problem Windows Trojan Horses
\par are, and you've become a little paranoid about your security. If you've ever
\par found yourself infected, I also hope that while reading the paper, you have
\par understood how you may have gotten infected the last time and I'm sure you
\par won't make the same mistake again. The paper will be regularly updated with
\par the latest info regarding the topic, as new variations of trojans and ways
\par of infection appear very often. If you think I've missed something, please
\par do not hesitate to contact me and contribute to it. Your feedback, ideas,
\par comments, suggestions and everything related to the paper and the topic will
\par be gratefully appreciated. I can be contacted at dancho.danchev@frame4.com.
\par 
\par Part of the Frame4 Security Systems Publications Archive, this paper can be
\par located at http://www.frame4.com/publications/index.php. Please visit the
\par archive to get the latest updates to this paper and many other security
\par related documents.
\par 
\par -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\par This paper is a Frame4 Security Systems publication, all rights reserved. You
\par may (re-)distribute the text as long as the content is not changed in any way
\par and with this header text intact. If you want to serve this paper on your web
\par site/FTP/Newsgroup/etc., I encourage you to do so but please do not change it
\par in any way without the prior permission of the author.
\par 
\par IMPORTANT -- THIS DOCUMENT IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY. To the maximum
\par extent permitted by applicable law, in no event shall Frame4 Security Systems
\par be liable for any damages whatsoever, (including, without limitation, damages
\par for loss of any business profits, business interruption, loss of any business
\par information, or other pecuniary loss) arising out of the use, or inability to
\par use any software, and/or procedures outlined in this document, even if Frame4
\par Security Systems has been advised of the possibility of such damage(s). There
\par are NO warranties with regard to this information, but the paper may help you
\par improve your Windows security a lot.
\par 
\par This paper is the property of Frame4 Security Systems, all rights reserved.
\par Copyright (c) 1999-2002 Frame4 Security Systems -- http://www.frame4.com/
\par ===============================================================================}{\insrsid13051012 
\par }}