{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\viewkind4\uc1\pard\qc\tx0\tx959\tx1918\tx2877\tx3836\tx4795\tx5754\tx6713\tx7672\tx8631\cf1\b\f0\fs18 240 BC\par
THE PAPYRUS OF ANI\par
(THE EGYPTIAN BOOK OF THE DEAD)\par
Translated by E.A. Wallis Budge\par
\pard\sb100\sa100\par
\pard\sb100\sa100\qc\line HYMN TO OSIRIS\line\line "Homage to thee, Osiris, Lord of eternity, King of the Gods, whose\line names are manifold, whose forms are holy, thou being of hidden form in\line the temples, whose Ka is holy. Thou art the governor of Tattu\line (Busiris), and also the mighty one in Sekhem (Letopolis). Thou art the\line Lord to whom praises are ascribed in the nome of Ati, thou art the\line Prince of divine food in Anu. Thou art the Lord who is commemorated in\line Maati, the Hidden Soul, the Lord of Qerrt (Elephantine), the Ruler\line supreme in White Wall (Memphis). Thou art the Soul of Ra, his own\line body, and hast thy place of rest in Henensu (Herakleopolis). Thou\line art the beneficent one, and art praised in Nart. Thou makest thy\line soul to be raised up. Thou art the Lord of the Great House in\line Khemenu (Hermopolis). Thou art the mighty one of victories in\line Shas-hetep, the Lord of eternity, the Governor of Abydos. The path\line of his throne is in Ta-tcheser (a part of Abydos). Thy name is\line established in the mouths of men. Thou art the substance of Two\line Lands (Egypt). Thou art Tem, the feeder of Kau (Doubles), the Governor\line of the Companies of the gods. Thou art the beneficent Spirit among the\line spirits. The god of the Celestial Ocean (Nu) draweth from thee his\line waters. Thou sendest forth the north wind at eventide, and breath from\line thy nostrils to the satisfaction of thy heart. Thy heart reneweth\line its youth, thou producest the.... The stars in the celestial heights\line are obedient unto thee, and the great doors of the sky open themselves\line before thee. Thou art he to whom praises are ascribed in the\line southern heaven, and thanks are given for thee in the northern heaven.\line The imperishable stars are under thy supervision, and the stars\line which never set are thy thrones. Offerings appear before thee at the\line decree of Keb. The Companies of the Gods praise thee, and the gods\line of the Tuat (Other World) smell the earth in paying homage to thee.\line The uttermost parts of the earth bow before thee, and the limits of\line the skies entreat thee with supplications when they see thee. The holy\line ones are overcome before thee, and all Egypt offereth thanksgiving\line unto thee when it meeteth Thy Majesty. Thou art a shining Spirit-Body,\line the governor of Spirit-Bodies; permanent is thy rank, established is\line thy rule. Thou art the well-doing Sekhem (Power) of the Company of the\line Gods, gracious is thy face, and beloved by him that seeth it. Thy fear\line is set in all the lands by reason of thy perfect love, and they cry\line out to thy name making it the first of names, and all people make\line offerings to thee. Thou art the lord who art commemorated in heaven\line and upon earth. Many are the cries which are made to thee at the Uak\line festival, and with one heart and voice Egypt raiseth cries of joy to\line thee.\line "Thou art the Great Chief, the first among thy brethren, the\line Prince of the Company of the Gods, the stablisher of Right and Truth\line throughout the World, the Son who was set on the great throne of his\line father Keb. Thou art the beloved of thy mother Nut, the mighty one\line of valour, who overthrew the Sebau-fiend. Thou didst stand up and\line smite thine enemy, and set thy fear in thine adversary. Thou dost\line bring the boundaries of the mountains. Thy heart is fixed, thy legs\line are set firm. Thou art the heir of Keb and of the sovereignty of the\line Two Lands (Egypt). He (Keb) hath seen his splendours, he hath\line decreed for him the guidance of the world by thy hand as long as times\line endure. Thou hast made this earth with thy hand, and the waters, and\line the winds, and the vegetation, and all the cattle, and all the\line feathered fowl, and all the fish, and all the creeping things, and all\line the wild animals therof. The desert is the lawful possession of the\line son of Nut. The Two Lands (Egypt) are content to crown thee upon the\line throne of thy father, like Ra.\line "Thou rollest up into the horizon, thou hast set light over the\line darkness, thou sendest forth air from thy plumes, and thou floodest\line the Two Lands like the Disk at daybreak. Thy crown penetrateth the\line height of heaven, thou art the companion of the stars, and the guide\line of every god. Thou art beneficent in decree and speech, the favoured\line one of the Great Company of the Gods, and the beloved of the Little\line Company of the Gods.\line His sister [Isis] hath protected him, and hath repulsed the\line fiends, and turned aside calamities (of evil). She uttered the spell\line with the magical power of her mouth. Her tongue was perfect, and it\line never halted at a word. Beneficent in command and word was Isis, the\line woman of magical spells, the advocate of her brother. She sought him\line untiringly, she wandered round and round about this earth in sorrow,\line and she alighted not without finding him. She made light with her\line feathers, she created air with her wings, and she uttered the death\line wail for her brother. She raised up the inactive members of whose\line heart was still, she drew from him his essence, she made an heir,\line she reared the child in loneliness, and the place where he was not\line known, and he grew in strength and stature, and his hand was mighty in\line the House of Keb. The Company of the Gods rejoiced, rejoiced, at the\line coming of Horus, the son of Osiris, whose heart was firm, the\line triumphant, the son of Isis, the heir of Osiris."\line REFERENCES\line REFERENCES\line\line Following is a list of frequently-mentioned geographical\line locations, and their commonly-known names:\line Abtu Abydos\line Abu Elephantine\line Anu Heliopolis\line Bast Bubastis\line Hensu Herakleopolis\line Het-ka-Ptah Memphis\line Khemenu Hermopolis\line Per-Menu Panopolis\line Qerrt Elephantine\line Sau Sais\line Sekhem Letopolis\line Suat Asyut\line Tetu Busiris\line Two Lands Upper and Lower Egypt\line Unu Hermopolis\line\line A HYMN OF PRAISE TO RA WHEN HE RISETH IN THE EASTERN PART OF HEAVEN:\line Behold, the Osiris Ani, the scribe of the holy offerings of all the\line gods, saith: Homage to thee, O thou who hast come as Khepera,\line Khepera the creator of the gods, Thou art seated on thy throne, thou\line risest up in the sky, illumining thy mother [Nut], thou art seated\line on thy throne as the king of the gods. [Thy] mother Nut stretcheth out\line her hands, and performeth an act of homage to thee. The domain of Manu\line receiveth thee with satisfaction. The goddess Maat embraceth thee at\line the two seasons of the day. May Ra give glory, and power, and\line thruth-speaking, and the appearance as a living soul so that he may\line gaze upon Heru-khuti, to the KA of the Osiris the Scribe Ani, who\line speaketh truth before Osiris, and who saith: Hail, O all ye gods of\line the House of the Soul, who weigh heaven and earth in a balance, and\line who give celestial food [to the dead]. Hail, Tatun, [who art] One,\line thou creator of mortals [and] of the Companies of the Gods of the\line South and of the North, of the West and of the East, ascribe ye praise\line to Ra, the lord of heaven, the KING, Life, Strength, and Health, the\line maker of the gods. Give ye thanks unto him in his beneficent form\line which is enthroned in the Atett Boat; beings celestial praise thee,\line beings terrestial praise thee. Thoth and the goddess Maat mark out thy\line course for thee day by day and every day. Thine enemy the Serpent hath\line been given over to the fire. The Serpent-fiend Sebau hath fallen\line headlong, his forelegs are bound in chains, and his hind legs hath\line Ra carried away from him. The Sons of Revolt shall never more rise up.\line The House of the Aged One keepeth festival, and the voices of those\line who make merry are in the Great Place. The gods rejoice when they\line see Ra crowned upon his throne, and when his beams flood the world\line with light. The majesty of this holy god setteth out on his journey,\line and he goeth onwards until he reacheth the land of Manu; the earth\line becometh light at his birth each day; he proceedeth until he\line reacheth the place where he was yesterday. O be thou at peace with me.\line Let me gaze upon thy beauties. Let me journey above the earth. Let\line me smite the Ass. Let me slit asunder the Serpent-fiend Sebau. Let\line me destroy Aepep at the moment of his greatest power. Let me behold\line the Abtu Fish at his season, and the Ant Fish with the Ant Boat as\line it piloteth it in its lake. Let me behold Horus when he is in charge\line of the rudder [of the Boat of Ra], with Thoth and the goddess Maat\line on each side of him. Let me lay hold of the tow-rope of the Sektet\line Boat, and the rope at the stern of the Matett Boat. Let Ra grant to me\line a view of the Disk (the Sun), and a sight of Ah (the Moon) unfailingly\line each day. Let my Ba-soul come forth to walk about hither and thither\line and whithersoever it pleaseth. Let my name be called out, let it be\line found inscribed on the tablet which recordeth the names of those who\line are to receive offerings. Let meals from the sepulchral offerings be\line given to me in the presence [of Osiris], as to those who are in the\line following of Horus. Let there be prepared for me a seat in the Boat of\line the Sun on the day wheron the god saileth. Let me be received in the\line presence of Osiris in the Land of Truth-speaking- the Ka of Osiris\line Ani.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nekht, Brit. Mus. No. 10471, Sheet 21)\line\line NEKHT, THE CAPTAIN OF SOLDIERS, THE ROYAL SCRIBE, SINGETH A HYMN\line OF PRAISE TO RA, and saith:- Homage to thee, O thou glorious Being,\line thou who art dowered [with all sovereignty]. O Tem-Heru-Khuti\line (Tem-Harmakhis), when thou risest in the horizon of heaven a cry of\line joy goeth forth to thee from all people. O thou beautiful Being,\line thou dost renew thyself in thy season in the form of the Disk,\line within thy mother Hathor. Therefore in every place every heart\line swelleth with joy at thy rising for ever. The regions of the South and\line the North come to thee with homage, and send forth acclamations at thy\line rising on the horizon of heaven, and thou illuminest the Two Lands\line with rays of turquoise-[coloured] light. O Ra, who art Heru-Khuti, the\line divine man-child, the heir of eternity, self-begotten and self-born,\line king of the earth, prince of the Tuat (the Other World), governor of\line Aukert, thou didst come from the Water-god, thou didst spring from the\line Sky-god Nu, who doth cherish thee and order thy members. O thou god of\line life, thou lord of love, all men live when thou shinest; thou art\line crowned king of the gods. The goddess Nut embraceth thee, and the\line goddess Mut enfoldeth thee at all seasons. Those who are in thy\line following sing unto thee with joy, and they bow down their foreheads\line to the earth when they meet thee, the lord of heaven, the lord of\line the earth, the King of Truth, the lord of eternity, the prince of\line everlastingness, thou sovereign of all the gods, thou god of life,\line thou creator of eternity, thou maker of heaven wherin thou art\line firmly stablished.\line The Company of the Gods rejoice at thy rising, the earth is glad\line when it beholdeth thy rays; the people who have been long dead come\line forth with cries of joy to behold thy beauties every day. Thou goest\line forth each day over heaven and earth, and thou art made strong each\line day be thy mother Nut. Thou passest over the heights of heaven, thy\line heart swelleth with joy; and the Lake of Testes (the Great Oasis) is\line content thereat. The Serpent-fiend hath fallen, his arms are hewn off,\line the Knife hath severed his joints. Ra liveth by Maat (Law), the\line beautiful! The Sektet Boat advanceth and cometh into port. The South\line and the North, and the West and East, turn to praise thee. O thou\line First, Great God (PAUTA), who didst come into being of thine own\line accord, Isis and Nephthys salute thee, they sing unto thee songs of\line joy at thy rising in the boat, they stretch out their hands unto thee.\line The Souls of the East follow thee, and the Souls of the West praise\line thee. Thou art the Ruler of all the gods. Thou in thy shrine hast joy,\line for the Serpent-fiend Nak hath been judged by the fire, and thy\line heart shall rejoice for ever. Thy mother Nut is esteemed by thy father\line Nu.\line HYMN TO OSIRIS UN-NEFER\line\line A Hymn of Praise to Osiris Un-Nefer, the great god who dwelleth in\line Abtu, the king of eternity, the lord of everlastingness, who\line traverseth millions of years in his existence. Thou art the eldest son\line of the womb of Nut. Thou was begotten by Keb, the Erpat. Thou art\line the lord of the Urrt Crown. Thou art he whose White Crown is lofty.\line Thou art the King (Ati) of gods [and] men. Thou hast gained possession\line of the sceptre of rule, and the whip, and the rank and dignity of\line thy divine fathers. Thy heart is expanded with joy, O thou who art\line in the kingdom of the dead. Thy son Horus is firmly placed on thy\line throne. Thou hast ascended thy throne as the Lord of Tetu, and as\line the Heq who dwelleth in Abydos. Thou makest the Two Lands to\line flourish through Truth-speaking, in the presence of him who is the\line Lord to the Uttermost Limit. Thou drawest on that which hath not yet\line come into being in thy name of "Ta-her-sta-nef." Thou governest the\line Two Lands by Maat in thy name of "Seker." Thy power is wide-spread,\line thou art he of whom the fear is great in thy name of "Usar" (or\line "Asar"). Thy existence endureth for an infinite number of double henti\line periods in thy name of "Un-Nefer."\line Homage to thee, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Prince of\line Princes. Thou hast ruled the Two Lands from the womb of the goddess\line Nut. Thou hast governed the Lands of Akert. Thy members are of\line silver-gold, thy head is of lapis-lazuli, and the crown of thy head is\line of turquoise. Thou art An of millions of years. Thy body is all\line pervading, O Beautiful Face in Ta-tchesert. Grant thou to me glory\line in heaven, and power upon earth, and truth-speaking in the Divine\line Underworld, and [the power to] sail down the river to Tetu in the form\line of a living Ba-soul, and [the power to] sail up the river to Abydos in\line the form of a Benu bird, and [the power to] pass in through and to\line pass out from, without obstruction, the doors of the lords of the\line Tuat. Let there be given unto me bread-cakes in the House of\line Refreshing, and sepulchral offerings of cakes and ale, and\line propitiatory offerings in Anu, and a permanent homestead in\line Sekhet-Aaru, with wheat and barley therein- to the Double of the\line Osiris, the scribe Ani.\line THE CHAPTERS OF COMING FORTH BY DAY\line\line HERE BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF COMING FORTH BY DAY, AND THE SONGS OF\line PRAISING AND GLORIFYING WHICH ARE TO BE RECITED FOR "COMING FORTH" AND\line FOR ENTERING INTO KHERT-NETER, AND THE SPELLS WHICH ARE TO BE SAID\line IN BEAUTIFUL AMENTET. THEY SHALL BE RECITED ON THE DAY OF THE FUNERAL,\line ENTERING IN AFTER COMING FORTH.\line\line The Osiris Ani, the Osiris the scribe Ani saith:- Homage to thee,\line O Bull of Amentet, Thoth the king of eternity is with me. I am the\line great god by the side of the divine boat, I have fought for thee, I am\line one of those gods, those divine chiefs, who proved the\line truth-speaking of Osiris before his enemies on the day of the weighing\line of words. I am thy kinsman Osiris. I am [one of] those gods who were\line the children of the goddess Nut, who hacked in pieces the enemies of\line Osiris, and who bound in fetters the legion of Sebau devils on his\line behalf. I am thy kinsman Horus, I have fought on thy behalf, I have\line come to thee for thy name's sake. I am Thoth who proved the truth of\line the words of Osiris before his enemies on the day of the weighing of\line words in the great House of the Prince, who dwelleth in Anu. I am\line Teti, the son of Teti. My mother conceived me in Tetu, and gave\line birth to me in Tetu. I am with the mourners [and with] the women who\line tear out their hair and make lament for Osiris in Taui-Rekhti, proving\line true the words of Osiris before his enemies. Ra commanded Thoth to\line\line prove true the words of Osiris before his enemies; what was\line commanded [for Osiris], let that be done for me by Thoth. I am with\line Horus on the day of dressing Teshtesh. I open the hidden water-springs\line for the ablutions of Urt-ab. I unbolt the door of the Shetait Shrine\line in Ra-stau. I am with Horus as the protector of the left shoulder of\line Osiris, the dweller in Sekhem. I enter in among and I come forth\line from the Flame-gods on the day of the destruction of the Sebau\line fiends in Sekhem. I am with Horus on the day[s] of the festivals of\line Osiris, at the making of offerings and oblations, namely, on the\line festival which is celebrated on the sixth day of the month, and on the\line day of the Tenat festival in Anu. I am the UAB priest (libationer)\line in Tetu, Rera, the dweller in Per-Asar. I exalt him that is upon the\line high place of the country. I look upon the hidden things (the\line mysteries) in Ra-stau. I recite the words of the liturgy of the\line festival of the Soul-god in Tetu. I am the SEM priest, and [perform]\line his duties. I am the UR-KHERP-HEM priest on the day of placing the\line Henu Boat of Seker upon its divine sledge. I have taken in my hand the\line digging tool on the day of digging up the earth in Hensu.\line Hail, O ye who make perfect souls to enter into the House of Osiris,\line make ye the well-instructed soul of the Osiris the scribe Ani, whose\line word is true, to enter in and to be with you in the House of Osiris.\line Let him hear even as ye hear; let him have sight even as ye have\line sight; let him stand up even as ye stand up; let him take his seat\line even as ye take your seats.\line Hail, O ye who give cakes and ale to perfect souls in the House of\line Osiris, give ye cakes and ale twice each day (in the morning and in\line the evening) to the soul of the Osiris Ani, whose word is true\line before the gods, the Lords of Abydos, and whose word is true with you.\line Hail, O ye who open up the way, who act as guides to the roads [in\line the Other World] to perfect souls in the House of Osiris, open ye up\line for him the way, and act ye as guides to the roads to the soul of\line the Osiris, the scribe, the registrary of all the offerings made to\line the gods, Ani, [whose word is true] with you. May he enter the House\line of Osiris with boldness, and may he come forth therefrom in peace. May\line there be no opposition made to him, and may he not be sent back\line [therefrom]. May he enter in under favour [of Osiris], and may he come\line forth gratified [at the acceptance of] his true words. May his\line commands be performed in the House of Osiris, may his words travel\line with you, may he be glorious as ye are. May he be not found to be\line light in the Balance, may the Balance dispose of his case.\line\line\line (In the Turin Papyrus, ed. Lepsius, this Chapter ends with the\line following.)\line\line Permit thou not me to be judged according to the mouths of the\line multitude. May my soul lift itself up before [Osiris], having been\line found to have been pure when on earth. May I come into thy presence, O\line Lord of the gods; may I arrive at the Nome of Maati (Truth); may I\line rise up on my seat like a god endowed with life; may I give forth\line light like the Company of the Gods who dwell in heaven; may I become\line like one of you; may I lift up my footsteps in the town of Kher-Aha;\line may I look upon the Sektet Boat of the god, Saah, the holy one, as\line it passeth across the sky; may I not be repulsed; may I look upon\line the Lords of the Tuat, or, according to another reading, the Company\line of the Gods; may I smell the savour of the divine food of the\line Company of the Gods; may I sit down with them; may my name be\line proclaimed for offerings by the KHER-HEB priest at the sacrificial\line table; may I hear the petitions which are made when offerings are\line presented; may I draw nigh unto the Neshem Boat; and may neither my\line Heart-soul nor its lord be repulsed.\line Homage to thee, O Chief of Amentet, thou god Osiris, who dwellest in\line the town of Nifu-ur. Grant thou that I may arrive in peace in Amentet.\line May the Lords of Ta-Tchesert receive me, and may they say unto me:\line "Hail, hail; welcome, welcome!" May they make ready for me a seat by\line the side of the President of the Chiefs; may the Nursing-goddesses\line receive me at the seasons, and may I come forth into the presence of\line Un-Nefer true of word. May I be a Follower of Horus in Ra-stau, and of\line Osiris in Tetu; and may I perform all the transformations which my\line heart may desire to make in every place wherein my Double (KA) wisheth\line to be.\line\line RUBRIC: If this text be known [by the deceased] upon earth or if\line he causeth it to be done in writing upon [his] coffin, then will he be\line able to come forth on any day he pleaseth, and to enter into his\line habitation unrepulsed. Cakes and ale and joints of meat from those\line which are on the altar of Ra shall be given unto him, and his\line homestead shall be among the fields of the Field of Reeds\line (Sekhet-Aaru), and wheat and barley shall be given unto him therein,\line and he shall flourish there even as he flourished upon earth.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nekhtu-Amen, ed. Naville, I, 5)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE SAHU TO ENTER THE TUAT ON THE DAY OF THE\line FUNERAL, WHEN THE FOLLOWING WORDS ARE TO BE SAID: Homage to thee, O\line thou who dwellest in the Holy Hill (Set-Tchesert) of Amentet! the\line Osiris, the royal scribe, Nekhtu-Amen, whose word is true, knoweth\line thee, he knoweth thy name. Deliver thou him from the worms which are\line in Ra-stau, which live upon the bodies of men and women, and feed upon\line their blood, for Osiris, the favoured servant of the god of his\line city, the royal scribe Nekhtu-Amen, knoweth you, and he knoweth your\line names. Let the order for his protection be the first command of\line Osiris, the Lord to the Uttermost Limit, who keepeth his body\line hidden. May he give him release from the Terrible One who dwelleth\line at the bend of the River of Amentet, and may he decree the acts that\line will make him to rise up. Let him pass on to him whose throne is\line placed within the darkness, who giveth light in Ra-stau. O thou Lord\line of Light, come thou and swallow up the worms which are in Amentet. Let\line the Great God who dwelleth in Tetu, and who is himself unseen, hear\line his prayers, and let those who cause afflictions hold him in fear as\line he cometh forth with the sentence of their doom to the Divine Block. I\line the Osiris, the royal scribe, Nekhtu-Amen, come, bearing the decree of\line Neb-er-tcher, and I am the Horus who taketh possession of his throne\line for him. His father, the lord of all those who are in the Boat of\line his Father Horus, hath ascribed praise unto him. He cometh bearing\line tidings....... let him see the town of Anu. Their chief shall stand on\line the earth before him, the scribes shall magnify him at the doors of\line their assemblies, and thy shall swathe im with swathings in Anu. He\line hath led heaven captive, and he hath seized the earth in his grasp.\line Neither the heavens nor the earth can be taken away from him, for,\line behold, he is Ra, the firstborn of the gods. His mother shall nurse\line him, and shall give him her breast on the horizon.\line\line RUBRIC: The words of this Chapter shall be said after [the deceased]\line is laid to rest in Amentet; by means of them the region Tenn-t shall\line be contented with her lord. And the Osiris, the royal scribe,\line Nekhtu-Amen, whose word is truth, shall come forth, and he shall\line embark in the Boat of Ra, and [his] body upon its bier shall be\line counted up, and he shall be established in the Tuat.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF GIVING A MOUTH TO THE OSIRIS ANI, THE SCRIBE, AND\line TELLER OF THE OFFERINGS WHICH ARE MADE TO ALL THE GODS, WHOSE WORD\line IS TRUE, WHO SAITH:- I rise up out of the Egg in the Hidden Land.\line May my mouth be given unto me that I may speak therewith in the\line presence of the Great God, the Lord of the Tuat. Let not my hand and\line my arm be repulsed in the presence of the Chiefs (Tchatchau) of any\line god. I am Osiris, the Lord of Ra-stau. May I, the Osiris, the scribe\line Ani, whose word is true, have my portion with him who is on the top of\line the Steps (Osiris). According to the desire of my heart I have come\line forth from the Island of Nesersert, and I have extinguished the fire.\line APPENDIX\line [The following passage is taken from the Saite Recension]\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF GIVING A MOUTH TO THE OSIRIS, THE SCRIBE ANI, WHO\line SAITH]:- Homage to thee, O thou lord of brightness, Governor of the\line Temple, Prince of the night and of the thick darkness. I have come\line unto thee. I am shining, I am pure. My hands are about thee, thou hast\line thy lot with thy ancestors. Give thou unto me my mouth that I may\line speak with it. I guide my heart at its season of flame and of night.\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be known by the Osiris the scribe Ani,\line upon earth, [or if it be done] in writing upon [his] coffin, he\line shall come forth by day in every form which he pleaseth, and he\line shall enter into [his] abode, and shall not be repulsed. And cakes,\line and ale, and joints of meat [from those which are on] the altar of\line Osiris shall be given unto him; and he shall enter in peace into\line Sekhet-Aaru, conformably to the decree of the Dweller in Busiris.\line Wheat and barley (dhura) shall be given unto him therein, and he shall\line flourish there just as he did upon earth; and he shall do whatsoever\line it pleaseth him to do, even as do the Company of the Gods who are in\line the Tuat, regularly and continually, for millions of times.\line\line\line (From the Paprys of Nebseni, Sheet 3)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY AND OF OPENING UP A WAY THROUGH\line THE AMEHET: Behold, the scribe Nebseni, whose word is truth, saith:-\line Homage to you, O ye Lords of Kau, ye who are without sin, and who live\line for the endless and infinite aeons of time which make up eternity. I\line have opened up a way for myself to you. I have become a spirit in my\line forms, I have gotten the mastery over my words of magical power, and I\line am adjudged a spirit; therefore deliver ye me from the Crocodile\line [which liveth in] this Country of Truth. Grant ye to me my mouth\line that I may speak therewith, and cause ye that sepulchral offerings\line shall be made unto me in your presence, for I know you, and I know\line your names, and I know also the name of the mighty god before whose\line face ye set your celestial food. His name is "Tekem." [When] he\line openeth up his path on the eastern horizon of heaven, [when] he\line alighteth towards the western horizon of heaven, may he carry me along\line with him, and may I be safe and sound. Let not the Mesqet make an\line end of me, let not the Fiend (Sebau) gain the mastery over me, let\line me not be driven away from the doors of the Other World, let not you\line doors be shut in my face, for my cakes are in the city of Pe, and my\line ale is in the city of Tep. And there, in the celestial mansions of\line heaven which my divine father Tem hath stablished, let my hands lay\line hold upon the wheat and the barley, which shall be given unto me\line therein in abundant measure, and may the son of my own body make ready\line for me my food therein. And grant ye unto me when I am there\line sepulchral meals, and incense, and unguents, and all the pure and\line beautiful things whereon the god liveth, in every deed for ever, in\line all the transformations which it pleaseth me [to perform], and grant\line unto me the power to float down and to sail up the stream in the Field\line of Reeds (Sekhet-Aaru), [and may I reach Sekhet-hetepet (the Field\line of Offerings)]. I am the twin Lion-gods (Shu and Tefnut).\line TEXTS RELATING TO THE WEIGHING OF THE HEART OF ANI\line\line THE NAMES OF THE GODS OF THE GREAT COMPANY:- 1. Ra Harmakhis, the\line Great God in his boat. 2. Temu. 3. Shu. 4. Tefnut. 5. Keb. 6. Nut, the\line Lady of Heaven. 7. Isis. 8. Nephthys. 9. Horus, the Great God. 10.\line Hathor, Lady of Amentet. 11. Hu. 12. Sa.\line\line THE PRAYER OF ANI:- My heart, my mother; my heart, my mother! My\line heart whereby I came into being! May nought stand up to oppose me at\line [my] judgment, may there be no opposition to me in the presence of the\line Chiefs (Tchatchau); may there be no parting of thee from me in the\line presence of him that keepeth the Balance! Thou art my KA, which\line dwelleth in my body; the god Khnemu who knitteth together and\line strengtheneth my limbs. Mayest thou come forth into the place of\line happiness whither we go. May the Sheniu officials, who make the\line conditions of the lives of men, not cause my name to stink, and may no\line lies be spoken against me in the presence of the God. [Let it be\line satisfactory unto us, and let the Listener god be favourable unto\line us, and let there be joy of heart (to us) at the weighing of words.\line Let not that which is false be uttered against me before the Great\line God, the Lord of Amentet. Verily, how great shalt thou be when thou\line risest in triumph.]\line\line THE SPEECH OF THOTH:- Thoth, the judge of right and truth of the\line Great Company of the Gods who are in the presence of Osiris, saith:\line Hear ye this judgment. The heart of Osiris hath in very truth been\line weighed, and his Heart-soul hath borne testimony on his behalf; his\line heart hath been found right by the trial in the Great Balance. There\line hath not been found any wickedness in him; he hath not wasted the\line offerings which have been made in the temples; he hath not committed\line any evil act; and he hath not set his mouth in motion with words of\line evil whilst he was upon earth.\line\line SPEECH OF THE DWELLER IN THE EMBALMMENT CHAMBER (ANUBIS):- Pay\line good heed, O righteous Judge to the Balance to support [the testimony]\line thereof. Variant: Pay good heed to the weighing in the Balance of\line the heart of the Osiris, the singing-woman of Amen, Anhai, whose\line word is truth, and place thou her heart in the seat of truth in the\line presence of the Great God.\line\line THE SPEECH OF THE GODS:- The Great Company of the Gods say to\line Thoth who dwelleth in Khemenu: That which cometh forth from thy\line mouth shall be declared true. The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is\line true, is holy and righteous. He hath not committed any sin, and he\line hath done no evil against us. The devourer Am-mit shall not be\line permitted to prevail over him. Meat offerings and admittance into\line the presence of the god Osiris shall be granted unto him, together\line with an abiding habitation in the Field of Offerings (Sekhet-hetepet),\line as unto the Followers of Horus.\line\line THE SPEECH OF HORUS TO OSIRIS IN INTRODUCING ANI TO HIM:- Horus, the\line son of Isis, saith: I have come to thee, O Un-Nefer, and I have\line brought unto thee the Osiris Ani. His heart is righteous, and it\line hath come forth from the Balance; it hath not sinned against any god\line or any goddess. Thoth hath weighed it according to the decree\line pronounced unto him by the Company of the Gods, and it is most true\line and righteous. Grant thou that cakes and ale may be given unto him,\line and let him appear in the presence of the god Osiris, and let him be\line like unto the Followers of Horus for ever and ever.\line\line THE SPEECH OF ANI:- And the Osiris Ani saith: Behold, I am in thy\line presence, O Lord of Amentet. There is no sin in my body. I have not\line spoken that which is not true knowingly, nor have I done anything with\line a false heart. Grant thou that I may be like unto those favoured\line ones who are in thy following, and that I may be an Osiris greatly\line favoured of the beautiful god, and beloved of the Lord of the Two\line Lands, I who am a veritable royal scribe who loveth thee, Ani, whose\line word is true before the god Osiris.\line\line DESCRIPTION OF THE BEAST AM-MIT:- Her forepart is like that of a\line crocodile, the middle of her body is like that of a lion, her hind\line quarters are like those of a hippopotamus.\line\line HERE BEGIN THE PRAISES AND GLORIFYINGS OF COMING OUT FROM AND OF\line GOING INTO THE GLORIOUS KHERT-NETER, WHICH IS IN THE BEAUTIFUL\line AMENTET, OF COMING FORTH BY DAY IN ALL THE FORMS OF EXISTENCE WHICH IT\line MAY PLEASE THE DECEASED TO TAKE, OF PLAYING AT DRAUGHTS, OF SITTING IN\line THE SEH HALL, AND OF APPEARING AS A LIVING SOUL:\line The Osiris the scribe Ani saith after he hath arrived in his haven\line of rest- now it is good for [a man] to recite [this work whilst he is]\line upon earth, for then all the words of Tem come to pass-\line\line "I am the god Tem in rising. I am the Only One. I came into\line existence in Nu. I am Ra who rose in the beginning, the ruler of\line this [creation]."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Ra, when at the beginning he rose in the city of Hensu,\line crowned like a king for his coronation. The Pillars of the god Shu\line were not as yet created, when he was upon the steps of him that\line dwelleth in Khemenu.\line "I am the Great God who created himself, even Nu, who made his names\line to become the Company of the Gods as gods."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Ra, the creator of the names of his limbs, which came into\line being in the form of the gods who are in the train of Ra.\line "I am he who cannot be repulsed among the gods."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Temu, the dweller in his disk, but others say that it is Ra\line when he riseth in the eastern horizon of the sky.\line "I am Yesterday, I know To-day."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "Yesterday is Osiris, and To-day is Ra, when he shall destroy the\line enemies of Neb-er-tcher (the lord to the uttermost limit), and when he\line shall establish as prince and ruler his son Horus.\line "Others, however, say that To-day is Ra, on the day when we\line commemorate the festival of the meeting of the dead Osiris with his\line father Ra, and when the battle of the gods was fought, in which\line Osiris, the Lord of Amentet, was the leader."\line\line What is this?\line\line "It is Amentet, [that is to say] the creation ofthe souls of the\line gods when Osiris was leader in Set-Amentet.\line "Others, however, say that it is the Amentet which Ra hath given\line unto me; when any god cometh he must rise up and fight for it.\line "I know the god who dwelleth therein."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Osiris. Others, however, say that his name is Ra, and that\line the god who dwelleth in Amentet is the phallus of Ra, wherewith he had\line union with himself.\line "I am the Benu bird which is in Anu. I am the keeper of the volume\line of the book (the Tablet of Destiny) of the things which have been\line made, and of the things which shall be made."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Osiris.\line "Others, however, say that it is the dead body of Osiris, and yet\line others say that it is the excrement of Osiris. The things which have\line been made, and the things which shall be made [refer to] the dead body\line of Osiris. Others again say that the things which have been made are\line Eternity, and the things which shall be made are Everlastingness,\line and that Eternity is the Day, and Everlastingness the Night.\line "I am the god Menu in his coming forth; may his two plumes be set on\line my head for me."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "Menu is Horis, the Advocate of his father [Osiris], and his\line coming forth means his birth. The two plumes on his head are Isis\line and Nephthys, when these goddesses go forth and set themselves\line thereon, and when they act as his protectors, and when they provide\line that which his head lacketh.\line "Others, however, say that the two plumes are the two exceedingly\line large uraei which are upon the head of their father Tem, and there are\line yet others who say that the two plumes which are upon the head of Menu\line are his two eyes.\line "The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is true, the registrar of all\line the offerings which are made to the gods, riseth up and cometh into\line his city."\line\line What is this [city]?\line\line "It is the horizon of his father Tem.\line "I have made an end of my shortcomings, and I have put away my\line faults."\line\line What is this?\line\line "It is the cutting of the navel string of the body of the Osiris the\line scribe Ani, whose word is true before all the gods, and all his faults\line are driven out.\line\line What is this ?\line\line "It is the purification [of Osiris] on the day of his birth.\line "I am purified in my great double nest which is in Hensu on the\line day of the offerings of the followers of the Great God who dwelleth\line therein."\line\line What is the "great double nest"?\line\line "The name of one nest is 'Millions of years,' and 'Great Green\line [Sea]' is the name of the other, that is to say 'Lake of Natron' and\line 'Lake of Salt.'\line "Others, however, say the name of the one is 'Guide of Millions of\line Years,' and that 'Great Green Lake' is name of the other. Yet others\line say that 'Begetter of Millions of Years' is the name of one, and\line 'Great Green Lake' is the name of the other. Now, as concerning the\line Great God who dwelleth therein, it is Ra himself.\line "I pass over the way, I know the head of the Island of Maati."\line\line What is this?\line\line "It is Ra-stau, that is to say, it is the gate to the South of\line Nerutef, and it is the Northern Gate of the Domain (Tomb of the god).\line "Now, as concerning the Island of Maati, it is Abtu.\line "Others, however, say that it is the way by which Father Tem\line travelleth when he goeth forth to Sekhet-Aaru, [the place] which\line produceth the food and sustenance of the gods who are [in] their\line shrines.\line "Now the Gate Tchesert is the Gate of the Pillars of Shu, that is to\line say, the Northern Gate of the Tuat.\line "Others, however, say that the Gate of Tchesert is the two leaves of\line the door through which the god Tem passeth when he goeth forth to\line the eastern horizon of the sky.\line "O ye gods who are in the presence [of Osiris], grant to me your\line arms, for I am the god who shall come into being among you."\line\line Who are these gods?\line\line "They are the drops of blood which came forth from the phallus of Ra\line when he went forth to perform his own mutilitation. These drops of\line blood sprang into being under the forms of the gods Hu and Sa, who are\line in the bodyguard of Ra, and who accompany the god Tem daily and\line every day.\line "I, Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, have filled for thee\line the utchat (the Eye of Ra, or of Horus), when it had suffered\line extinction on the day of the combat of the Two Fighters (Horus and\line Set)."\line\line What was this combat?\line\line It was the combat which took place on the day when Horus fought with\line Set, during which Set threw filth in the face of Horus, and Horus\line crushed the genitals of Set. The filling of the utchat Thoth performed\line with his own fingers.\line "I remove the thunder-cloud from the sky when there is a storm\line with thunder and lightning therein."\line\line What is this?\line\line "This storm was the raging of Ra at the thunder-cloud which [Set]\line sent forth against the Right Eye of Ra (the Sun). Thoth removed the\line thunder-cloud from the Eye of Ra, and brought back the Eye living,\line healthy, sound, and with no defect in it to its owner.\line "Others, however, say that the thunder-cloud is caused by sickness\line in the Eye of Ra, which weepeth for its companion Eye (the Moon); at\line this time Thoth cleanseth the Right Eye of Ra.\line "I behold Ra who was born yesterday from the thighs of the goddess\line Mehurt; his strength is my strength, and my strength is his strength."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "Mehurt is the great Celestial Water, but others say that Mehurt\line is the image of the Eye of Ra at dawn at his birth daily.\line "[Others, however, say that] Mehurt is the utchat of Ra.\line "Now Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, is a very great one\line among the gods who are in the following of Horus; they say that he\line is the prince who loveth his lord."\line\line Who are the gods who are in the train of Horus?\line\line "[They are] Kesta, Hapi, Taumutef, and Qebhsenuf.\line "Homage to you, O ye lords of right and truth, ye sovereign\line princes (Tchatcha) who [stand] round about Osiris, who do away utterly\line sins and offences, and who are in the following of the goddess\line Hetepsekhus, grant ye that I may come unto you. Destroy ye all the\line faults which are within me, even as ye did for the Seven Spirits who\line are among the followers of their lord Sepa. Anpu (Anubis) appointed to\line them their places on the day [when he said unto them], "Come ye\line hither."\line\line Who are the "lords of right and truth"?\line\line "The lords of right and truth are Thoth and Astes, the Lord of\line Amentet.\line "The Tchatcha round about Osiris are Kesta, Hapi, Tuamutef, and\line Qebhsenuf, and they are also round about the Constellation of the\line Thigh (the Great Bear), in the northern sky.\line "Those who do away utterly sins and offences, and who are in the\line following of the goddess Hetepsekhus, are the god Sebek and his\line associates who dwell in the water.\line "The goddess Hetepsekhus is the Eye of Ra.\line "Others, however, say that it is the flame which accompanieth Osiris\line to burn up the souls of his enemies.\line "As concerning all the faults which are in Osiris, the registrar\line of the offerings which are made unto all the gods, Ani, whose word\line is truth, [these are all the offences which he hath committed\line against the Lords of Eternity] since he came forth from his mother's\line womb.\line "As concerning the Seven Spirits who are Kesta, Hapi, Tuamutef,\line Qebhsenuf, Maa-atef, Kheribeqef and Heru-khenti-en-ariti, these did\line Anubis appoint to be protectors of the dead body of Osiris.\line "Others, however, say that he set them round about the holy place of\line Osiris.\line "Others say that the Seven Spirits [which were appointed by\line Anubis] were Netcheh-netcheh, Aatqetqet, Nertanef-besef-khenti-hehf,\line Aq-her-ami-unnut-f, Tesher-ariti-ami-Het-anes,\line Ubes-her-per-em-khetkhet, and Maaem-kerh-annef-em-hru.\line "The chief of the Tchatcha (sovereign princes) who is in Naarutef is\line Horus, the Advocate of his father.\line "As concerning the day wherein [Anubis said to the Seven Spirits],\line 'Come ye hither,' [the allusion here] is to the words 'Come ye\line hither,' which Ra spake unto Osiris."\line\line Verily may these same words be said unto me in Amentet.\line\line "I am the Divine Soul which dwelleth in the Divine Twin-gods."\line\line Who is this Divine Soul?\line\line "It is Osiris. [When] he goeth into Tetu, and findeth there the Soul\line of Ra, the one god embraceth the other, and two Divine Souls spring\line into being within the Divine Twin-gods."\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nebseni, Brit. Mus. No. 9900, Sheet 14, ll.\line 16ff.)\line\line "As concerning the Divine Twin-gods they are Heru-netch-her-tefef\line and Heru-khent-en-Ariti (Horus the Advocate of his father [Osiris],\line and Horus the sightless).\line "Others say that the double Divine Soul which dwelleth in the Divine\line Twin-gods is the Soul of Ra and the Soul of Osiris, and yet others say\line that it is the Soul which dwelleth in Shu, and the Sould which\line dwelleth in Tefnut, and that these two Souls form the double Divine\line Soul which dwelleth in Tetu.\line "I am the Cat which fought near the Persea Tree in Anu on the\line night when the foes of Neb-er-tcher were destroyed."\line\line Who is this Cat?\line\line "This male Cat is Ra himself, and he was called 'Mau' because of the\line speech of the god Sa, who said concerning him: 'He is like (mau)\line unto that which he hath made'; therefore, did the name of Ra become\line 'Mau.'\line "Others, however, say that the male Cat is the god Shu, who made\line over the possessions of Keb to Osiris.\line "As concerning the fight which took place near the Persea Tree in\line Anu [these words have reference to the slaughter] of the children of\line rebellion, when righteous retribution was meted out to them for [the\line evil] which they had done.\line "As concerning the 'night of the battle,' [these words refer to] the\line invasion of the eastern portion of the heaven by the children of\line rebellion, whereupon a great battle arose in heaven and in all the\line earth.\line "O thou who art in thine egg (Ra,) who showest from thy Disk, who\line risest on thy horizon, and dost shine with golden beams in the\line height of heaven, like unto whom there is none among the gods, who\line sailest above the Pillars of Shu, who sendest forth blasts of fire\line from thy mouth, [who illuminest the Two Lands with thy splendour,\line deliver] thou Nebseni, the lord of fealty [to Osiris], from the god\line whose form is hidden, and whose eyebrows are like unto the two arms of\line the Balance on the night when the sentences of doom are promulgated."\line\line Who is this invisible god?\line\line "It is An-a-f (he who bringeth his arm.).\line "As concerning 'the night when the sentences of doom are\line promulgated,' it is the night of the burning of the damned, and of the\line overthrow of the wicked at the Block, and of the slaughter of souls."\line\line Who is this [slaughterer of souls]?\line\line "It is Shesmu, the headsman of Osiris.\line "[Concerning the invisible god] some say that he is Aapep when he\line riseth up with a head bearing upon it [the feather of] Maat (Truth).\line But others say that he is Horus when he riseth up with two heads,\line whereon one beareth [the feather of] Maat, and the other [the symbol\line of] wickedness. He bestoweth wickedness on him that worketh\line wickedness, and right and truth upon him that followeth\line righteousness and truth.\line "Others say that he is Heru-ur (the Old Horus), who dwelleth in\line Sekhem; others say that he is Thoth; others say that he is\line Nefer-Tem; and others say that he is Sept who doth bring to nought the\line acts of the foes of Nebertcher.\line "Deliver thou the scribe Nebseni, whose word is truth, from the\line Watchers, who carry murderous knives, who possess cruel fingers, and\line who would slay those who are in the following of Osiris."\line May these Watchers never gain the mastery over me, and may I never\line fall under their knives!\line\line Who are these Watchers?\line\line "They are Anubis and Horus, [the latter being] in the form of\line Horus the sightless. Others, however, say that they are the Tchatcha\line (sovereign princes of Osiris), who bring to nought the operations of\line their knives; and others say that they are the chiefs of the Sheniu\line chamber.\line "May their knives never gain the mastery over me. May I never fall\line under the knives wherewith they inflict cruel tortures. For I know\line their names, and I know the being, Matchet, who is among them in the\line House of Osiris. He shooteth forth rays of light from his eye, being\line himself invisible, and he goeth round about heaven robed in the flames\line which come from his mouth, commanding Hapi, but remaining invisible\line himself. May I be strong on earth before Ra, may I arrive safely in\line the presence of Osiris. O ye who preside over your altars, let not\line your offerings to me be wanting, for I am one of those who follow\line after Nebertcher, according to the writings of Khepera. Let me fly\line like a hawk, let me cackle like a goose, let me lay always like the\line serpent-goddess Neheb-ka."\line\line Who are those who preside over their altars?\line\line "Those who preside over their altars are the similitude of the Eye\line of Ra, and the similitude of the Eye of Horus.\line "O Ra-Tem, thou Lord of the Great House [in Anu], thou Sovereign\line (life, strentgh, health [be to thee]) of all the gods, deliver thou\line the scribe Nebseni, whose word is truth, from the god whose face is\line like unto that of a greyhound, whose brows are like those of a man,\line who feedeth upon the dead, who watcheth at the Bend of the Lake of\line Fire, who devoureth the bodies of the dead, and swalloweth hearts, and\line who voideth filth, but who himself remaineth unseen."\line\line Who is this greyhound-faced god?\line\line "His name is 'Everlasting Devourer,' and he liveth in the Domain [of\line Fire] (the Lake of Unt).\line "As concerning the Domain of Fire, it is that Aat which is in\line Naarutef, and is near the Sheniu chamber. The sinner who walketh\line over this place falleth down among the knives [of the Watchers].\line "Others, however, say that the name of this god is 'Mates,' and that\line he keepeth watch over the door of Amentet; others say that his name is\line 'Beba,' and that he keepeth watch over the Bend [of the stream] of\line Amentet, and yet others say that his name is 'Herisepef.'\line "Hail, Lord of Terror, Chief of the Lands of the South and North,\line thou Lord of the Desert, who dost keep prepared the block of\line slaughter, and who dost feed on the intestines [of men]!"\line\line Who is this Lord of Terror?\line\line "It is the Keeper of the Bend [of the stream] of Amentet."\line\line Who is this Keeper?\line\line "It is the Heart of Osiris, which is the devourer of all slaughtered\line things.\line "The Urrt Crown hath been given unto him, with gladness of heart, as\line Lord of Hensu."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "He to whom the Urrt Crown hath been given with gladness of heart as\line Lord of Hensu is Osiris. He was bidden to rule among the gods on the\line day of the union of earth [with earth] in the presence of Nebertcher."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "He who was bidden to rule among the gods is the son of Isis\line (Horus), who was appointed to rule in the room of his father Osiris.\line "As concerning [the words] 'day of the union of earth with earth,'\line they have reference to the union of earth with earth in the coffin\line of Osiris, the Soul that liveth in Hensu, the giver of meat and drink,\line the destroyer of wrong, and the guide to the everlasting paths."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Ra himself."\line\line "[Deliver thou the Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth]\line from the great god who carrrieth away souls, who eateth hearts, who\line feedeth upon offal, who keepeth watch in the darkness, who dwelleth in\line the Seker Boat; those who live in sin fear him."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Suti, but others say that it is Smamur, the soul of Keb.\line "Hail, Khepera in thy boat, the two Companies of the Gods are in thy\line body. Deliver thou the Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth,\line from the Watchers who pass sentences of doom, who have been\line appointed by the god Nebertcher to protect him, and to fasten the\line fetters on his foes, and who slaughter in the torture chambers;\line there is no escape from their fingers. May they never stab me with\line their knives, may I never fall helpless into their chambers of\line torture. I have never done the things which the gods hate. I am he who\line is pure in the Mesqet chamber. And saffron cakes have been brought\line unto him in Tannt."\line\line Who is this?\line\line "It is Khepera in his boat; it is Ra himself.\line "As concerning the Watchers who pass sentences of doom, they are the\line Apes Isis and Nephthys.\line "As concerning the things which the gods hate, they are acts of\line deceit and lying. He who passeth through the place of purification\line within the Mesqet chamber is Anpu (Anubis), who is hard by the\line coffer which containeth the inward parts of Osiris. He to whom saffron\line cakes have been brought in Tannt is Osiris.\line "Others, however, say that the saffron cakes in Tannt represent\line heaven and earth, and others say that they represent Shu, the\line strengthener of the Two Lands in Hensu; and others say that they\line represent the Eye of Horus, and that Tannt is the burial-place of\line Osiris.\line "Tem hath builded thy house, and the double Lion-god hath laid the\line foundations of thy habitation. Lo! medicaments have been brought.\line Horus purifieth Set and Set strengtheneth, and Set purifieth and Horus\line strengtheneth.\line "The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth before Osiris,\line hath come into this land, and he hath taken possession thereof with\line his two feet. He is Tem, and he is in the city.\line "Turn thou back, O Rehu, whose mouth shineth, whose head moveth,\line turn thou back before his strength." Another reading is, 'Turn thou\line back from him who keepeth watch, and is himself unseen.' Let the\line Osiris Ani be safely guarded. He is Isis, and he is found with her\line hair spread over him; it is shaken out over his brow. He was conceived\line by Isis, and engendered by Nephthys, and they have cut away from him\line the things which should be cut from him.\line "Fear followeth after thee, terror is about thine arms. Thou hast\line been embraced for millions of years by arms; mortals go round about\line thee. Thou smitest down the mediators of thy foes, and thou seizest\line the arms of the power of darkness. Thy two sisters (Isis and Nephthys)\line are given to thee for thy delight. Thou hast created that which is\line in Kher-aha, and that which is Anu. Every god feareth thee, for thou\line art exceedingly great and terrible; thou [avengest] every god on the\line man who curseth him, and thou shootest arrows at him. Thou livest\line according to thy will. Thou art Uatchet, the Lady of Flame, evil\line befalleth those who set themselves up against thee."\line\line What is this?\line\line "'Hidden in form, given of Menhu,' is the name of the "tomb. 'He who\line seeth what is on his hand' is the name of Qerau, or, as others say, it\line is the name of the Block.\line "Now, he whose mouth shineth and whose head moveth is the phallus of\line Osiris, but others say it is [the phallus] of Ra. 'Thou spreadest\line thy hair, and I shake it out over his brow" is said concerning Isis,\line who hideth in her hair, and draweth it round about her.\line "Uatchet, the Lady of Flames, is the Eye of Ra."\line THE SEVEN ARITS\line\line\line The First Arit.\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Sekhet-her-asht-aru. The name of the\line Watcher is Smetti. The name of the Herald is Hakheru.\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, shall say when he cometh unto\line the First Arit: "I am the mighty one who createth his own light. I\line have come unto thee, O Osiris, and, purified from that which\line defileth thee, I adore thee. Lead on. Name not the name of Ra-stau\line to me. Homage to thee, O Osiris, in thy might and in thy strength in\line Ra-stau. Rise up and conquer, O Osiris, in Abtu. Thou goest round\line about heaven, thou sailest in the presence of Ra, thou lookest upon\line all the beings who have knowledge. Hail, Ra, thou who goest round\line about in the sky, I say, O Osiris in truth, that I am the Sahu\line (Spirit-body) of the god, and I beseech thee not to let me be driven\line away, nor to be cast upon the wall of blazing fire. Let the way be\line opened in Ra-stau, let the pain of the Osiris be relieved, embrace\line that which the Balance hath weighed, let a path be made for the Osiris\line in the Great Valley, and let the Osiris have light to guide him on his\line way."\line\line\line The Second Arit.\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Unhat. The name of the Watcher is\line Seqt-her. The name of the Herald is Ust.\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, shall say [when he cometh to\line this Arit]: "He sitteth to carry out his heart's desire, and he\line weigheth words as the Second of Thoth. The strength which protecteth\line Thoth humbleth the hidden Maati gods, who feed upon Maat during the\line years of their lives. I offer up my offerings [to him] at the moment\line when he maketh his way. I advance, and I enter on the path. O grant\line thou that I may continue to advance, and that I may attain to the\line sight of Ra, and of those who offer up [their] offerings."\line\line\line The Third Arit.\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Unem-hauatu-ent-pehui. The name of the\line Watcher is Seres-her. The name of the Herald is Aa.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, shall say [when he\line cometh to this Arit]: "I am he who is hidden in the great deep. I am\line the Judge of the Rehui, I have come and I have done away the offensive\line thing which was upon Osiris. I tie firmly the place on which he\line standeth, coming forth from the Urt. I have stablished things in Abtu,\line I have opened up a way through Ra-stau, and I have relieved the pain\line which was in Osiris. I have balanced the place whereon he standeth,\line and I have made a path for him; he shineth brilliantly in Ra-stau."\line\line\line The Fourth Arit.\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Khesef-her-asht-kheru. The name of the\line Watcher is Seres-tepu. The name of the Herald is Khesef-at.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, shall say [when he\line cometh to this Arit]: "I am the Bull, the son of the ancestress of\line Osiris. O grant ye that his father, the Lord of his god-like\line companions, may bear witness on his behalf. I have weighed the\line guilty in judgment. I have brought unto his nostrils the life which is\line ever lasting. I am the son of Osiris, I have accomplished the journey,\line I have advanced in Khert-Neter."\line\line\line The Fifth Arit.\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Ankhf-em-fent. The name of the Watcher\line is Shabu. The name of the Herald is Teb-her-kha-kheft.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, shall say [when he\line cometh to this Arit]: "I have brought unto thee the jawbone in\line Ra-stau. I have brought unto thee thy backbone in Anu. I have gathered\line together his manifold members therein. I have driven back Aapep for\line thee. I have spit upon the wounds [in his body]. I have made myself\line a path among you. I am the Aged One among the gods. I have made\line offerings to Osiris. I have defended him with the word of truth. I\line have gathered together his bones, and have collected all his members."\line\line\line The Sixth Arit.\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Atek-tau-kehaq-kheru. The name of\line the Watcher is An-her. The name of the Herald is Ates-her-[ari]-she.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, shall say [when he\line cometh to this Arit]: "I have come daily, I have come daily. I have\line made myself a way. I have advanced over that which was created by Anpu\line (Anubis). I am the Lord of the Urrt Crown. I am the possessor [of\line the knowledge of] the words of magical power, I am the Avenger\line according to law, I have avenged [the injury to] his Eye. I have\line defended Osiris. I have accomplished my journey. The Osiris Ani\line advanceth with you with the word which is truth."\line\line\line The Seventh Arit:\line\line The name of the Doorkeeper is Sekhmet-em-tsu-sen. The name of the\line Watcher is Aa-maa-kheru. The name of the Herald is Khesef-khemi.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, shall say [when he\line cometh to this Arit]: "I have come unto thee, O Osiris, being purified\line from foul emissions. Thou goest round about heaven, thou seest Ra,\line thou seest the beings who have knowledge. [Hail], thou, ONE! Behold,\line thou art in the Sektet Boat which traverseth the heavens. I speak what\line I will to his Sahu (Spirit-body). He is strong, and cometh into\line being even [as] he spake. Thou meetest him face to face. Prepare\line thou for me all the ways which are good [and which lead] to thee."\line\line RUBRIC: If [these] words be recited by the spirit when he shall come\line to the Seven Arits, and as he entereth the doors, he shall neither\line be turned back nor repulsed before Osiris, and he shall be made to\line have his being among the blessed spirits, and to have dominion among\line the ancestral followers of Osiris. If these things be done for any\line spirit he shall have his being in that place like a lord of eternity\line in one body with Osiris, and at no place shall any being contend\line against him.\line THE PYLONS OF THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the FIRST PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Lady of\line tremblings, high-walled, the sovereign lady, the lady of\line destruction, who uttereth the words which drive back the destroyers,\line who delivereth from destruction him that cometh." The name of her\line Doorkeeper is Neruit.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the SECOND PYLON. The\line Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Lady of heaven,\line Mistress of the Two Lands, devourer by fire, Lady of mortals, who\line art infinitely greater than any human being." The name of her\line Doorkeeper is Mes-Ptah.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the THIRD PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Lady of the\line Altar, the mighty lady to whom offerings are made, greatly beloved one\line of every god sailing up the river to Abydos." The name of her\line Doorkeeper is Sebqa.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the FOURTH PYLON. The\line Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Prevailer with\line knives, Mistress of the Two Lands, destroyer of the enemies of the\line Still-Heart (Osiris), who decreeth the release of those who suffer\line through evil hap." The name of her Doorkeeper is Nekau.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the FIFTH PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Flame, Lady of\line fire, absorbing the entreaties which are made to her, who permitteth\line not to approach her the rebel." The name of her Doorkeeper is\line Henti-Reqiu.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the SIXTH PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Lady of light,\line who roareth mightily, whose breadth cannot be comprehended. Her like\line hath not been found since the beginning. There are serpents over which\line are unknown. They were brought forth before the Still-Heart." The name\line of her Doorkeeper is Semati.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the SEVENTH PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Garment\line which envelopeth the helpless one, which weepeth for and loveth that\line which it covereth." The name of her Doorkeeper is Saktif.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the EIGHTH PYLON. The\line Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Blazing fire,\line unquenchable, with far-reaching tongues of flame, irresistible\line slaughterer, which one may not pass through fear of its deadly\line attack." The name of her Doorkeeper is Khutchetef.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the NINTH PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:\line "Chieftainess, lady of strength, who giveth quiet of heart to the\line offspring of her lord. Her girth is three hundred and fifty khet,\line and she is clothed with green feldspar of the South. She bindeth up\line the divine form and clotheth the helpless one. Devourer, lady of all\line men." The name of her Doorkeeper is Arisutchesef.\line\line The following shall be said when one cometh to the TENTH PYLON.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith: "Goddess of the\line loud voice, who maketh her suppliants to mourn, the awful one who\line terrifieth, who herself remaineth unterrified within." The name of her\line Doorkeeper is Sekhenur.\line\line Nu, the steward of the keeper of the seal, saith when he cometh to\line the ELEVENTH PYLON of Osiris: "I have made my way, I know you, and I\line know thy name, and I know the name of her who is within thee: She\line who slayeth always, consumer of the fiends by fire, mistress of\line every pylon, the lady who is acclaimed on the day of darkness" is\line thy name. She inspecteth the swathing of the helpless one.\line\line The Osiris Nu, the steward of the keeper of the seal, saith when\line he cometh to the TWELFTH PYLON of Osiris: "I have made my way, I\line know you, and I know thy name, and I know the name of her who is\line within thee: Invoker of thy Two Lands, destroyer of those who come\line to thee by fire, lady of spirits, obeyer of the word of thy Lord" is\line thy name. She inspecteth the swathing of the helpless one.\line\line The Osiris Nu, the steward of the keeper of the seal, saith when\line he cometh to the THIRTEENTH PYLON of Osiris: "I have made my way, I\line know you and I know thy name, and I know the name of her who is within\line thee: Osiris foldeth his arms about her, and maketh Hapi (the\line Nile-god), to emit splendour out of his hidden places" is thy name.\line She inspecteth the swathing of the helpless one.\line\line The Osiris Nu, the steward of the keeper of the seal, saith when\line he cometh to the FOURTEENTH PYLON of Osiris: "I have made my way, I\line know thee, and I know thy name, and I know the name of her who is\line within thee. Lady of might, who trampleth on the Red Demons, who\line keepeth the festival of Haaker on the day of the hearing of faults" is\line thy name. She inspecteth the swathing of the helpless one.\line\line THE FIFTEENTH PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is truth,\line shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Fiend, red of hair and\line eyes, who appeareth by night, and doth fetter the fiend in his lair.\line Let her hands be given to the Still-Heart in his hour, let her advance\line and go forward" is thy name. She inspecteth the swathing of the\line helpless one.\line\line THE SIXTEENTH PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is truth,\line shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Terrible one, lady of the\line rain-storm, destroyer of the souls of men, devourer of the bodies of\line men, orderer, producer, and maker of slaughter" is thy name. She\line inspecteth the swathing of the helpless one.\line\line THE SEVENTEENTH PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is\line truth, shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Hewer-in-pieces in\line blood, Ahibit, lady of hair" is thy name. She inspecteth the\line swathing of the helpless one.\line\line THE EIGHTEENTH PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is\line truth, shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Fire-lover, pure\line one, lover of slaughterings, cutter off of heads, devoted one, lady of\line the Great House, slaughterer of fiends at eventide" is thy name. She\line inspecteth the swathing of the helpless one.\line\line THE NINETEENTH PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is\line truth, shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Light-giver for\line life, blazing all the day, lady of strength [and of] the writings of\line the god Thoth himself" is thy name. She inspecteth the swathings of\line the White House.\line\line THE TWENTIETH PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is truth,\line shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Dweller in the cavern of\line her lord, her name is Clother, hider of her creations, conqueror of\line hearts, swallower [of them]" is thy name. She inspecteth the swathings\line of the White House.\line\line THE TWENTY-FIRST PYLON. The Osiris Heru-em-khebit, whose word is\line truth, shall say when he cometh to this pylon: "Knife which cutteth\line when [its name] is uttered, slayer of those who approach thy flame" is\line thy name. She possesseth hidden plans.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Turin Papryus, ed. Lepsius, Bl. 64, the text referring\line to the twenty-first Pylon.)\line\line THE OSIRIS AUFANKH, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH, SAITH: Hail, saith Horus, O\line Twenty-first pylon of the Still-Heart! I have made the way. I know\line thee. I know thy name. I know the name of the goddess who guardeth\line thee. "Sword that smiteth at the utterance of its own name, stinking\line face, overthrower of him that approacheth her flame" is thy name. Thou\line keepest the hidden things of the avenger of the god, thou guardest\line them. Amam is his name. He maketh the ash trees (cedars) not to\line grow, and the shenu trees (acacias) not to blossom, and preventeth\line copper from being found in the mountain. The Tchatcha (Chiefs) of this\line Pylon are Seven Gods. Tchen, or Anthch (At), is the name of the one at\line the door. Hetepmes is the name of another there. Messep is the name of\line another there. Utchara is the name of another there. Beq is the name\line of another there. Anp (Anubis) is the name of another there.\line I have made the way. I am Menu-Heru, the avenger of his father,\line the heir of his father Un-Nefer. I have come. I have given [offerings]\line to my father Osiris. I have overthrown all his enemies. I have come\line daily with the word of truth, the lord of fealty, in the house of my\line father Tem, the Lord of Anu, I, the Osiris Auf-ankh, whose word is\line truth in the southern heaven. I have done what is right for him that\line made the right, I have celebrated the Haker festival to the lord\line thereof. I have acted as the leader of the festivals. I have given\line cakes to the Lords of the Altar. I have been the leader of the\line propitiatory offerings, cakes, ale, oxen, geese, to my father Osiris\line Un-Nefer. I am the protector of the Ba-soul, I have made the Benu bird\line to appear [by my] words. I have come daily into the house of the god\line to make offerings of incense. I have come with the shenti tunic. I\line have set the Neshem Boat afloat on the water. I have made the word\line of Osiris Khenti Amenti to be truth before his enemies. I have carried\line away in a boat all his enemies to the slaughter-house of the East, and\line they shall never escape from the wardship of the god Keb who\line dwelleth therein. I have made the Kefaiu gods of Ra to stand up, I\line have made his word to be truth. I have come as a scribe. I have\line explained [the writings]. I have made the god to have power over his\line legs. I have come into the house of him that is upon his mountain\line (Anubis). I have seen the Chief of the Seh hall. I have entered into\line Ra-stau. I have made myself invisible. I have found for myself the\line boundary. I have approached Nerutef. I have clothed the naked. I\line have sailed up the river to Abydos. I have performed the ceremonies of\line Hu and Sa. I have entered the house of Astes. I have made supplication\line to the Khati gods and to Sekhmet in the temple of Net (Neith), or\line the Aged Ones. I have entered Ra-stau. I have made myself invisible. I\line have found the frontier. I have approached Nerutef. I have clothed the\line naked. I have sailed up the river to Abydos. I have performed the\line ceremonies of Hu and Sa. I have received. I have risen like a king\line crowned. I fill my seat on the throne in the place of my father, the\line God Who was at the beginning. I have praised the Meskhen of\line Ta-tchesert. My mouth is full of Maat (Truth). I have overwhelmed\line the Akhekhau serpents. I have come into the Great House with [my] body\line in a flourishing condition. I have caused myself to travel in the Boat\line of Hai. The myrrh unguent of..... is in the hair of men (Rekhit). I\line have entered into the House of Astes. I have approached with worship\line the two Khati gods and Sekhmet, who are in the temple of the Aged\line One [in Anu].\line [And the god Osiris saith:] "Thou hast come, thou shalt be a\line favoured one in Tetu, O Osiris Auf-ankh, whose word is truth, the\line son of the lady Shert-en-Menu, whose word is truth."\line THE PRIESTS ANMUTEF AND SAMEREF\line\line THE SPEECH OF THE PRIEST ANMUTEF.\line I have come unto you, O ye great Tchatcha Chiefs who dwell in\line heaven, and upon earth, and in Khert-Neter, and I have brought unto\line you the Osiris Ani. He hath not committed any act which is an\line abomination before all the gods. Grant ye that he may live with you\line every day.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani adoreth Osiris, Lord of Rasta, and the\line Great Company of the Gods who live in Khert-Neter. He saith: "Homage\line to thee, Khenti Amenti, Un-Nefer, who dwellest in Abtu. I come to\line thee. My heart holdeth Truth. There is no sin in my body. I have not\line told a lie wittingly, I have not acted in a double manner. Grant\line thou to me cakes, let me appear in the presence, at the altar of the\line Lords of Truth, let me go in and come forth from Khert-Neter [at\line will], let not my Heart-soul be driven away [from me]; and grant me\line a sight of the Disk and the beholding of the Moon for ever and ever.\line\line\line THE SPEECH OF THE PRIEST SAMEREF.\line I have come unto you, O ye Tchatcha Chiefs who dwell in Rasta, and I\line have brought unto you the Osiris Ani, grant ye unto him cakes, and\line water, and air, and a homestead in Sekhet-hetep as to the followers of\line Horus.\line The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, adoreth Osiris,\line the Lord of everlastingness, and the Tchatcha Chiefs, the Lords of\line Rasta. He saith: "Homage to thee, O King of Khert-Neter, thou Governor\line of Akert! I have come unto thee. I know thy plans, I am equipped\line with the forms which thou takest in the Tuat. Give thou to me a\line place in Khert-Neter, near the Lords of Truth. May my homestead be\line lasting in Sekhet-hetep, may I receive cakes in thy presence."\line THE JUDGES IN ANU\line\line Hail, Thoth, who madest to be true the word of Osiris against his\line enemies, make thou the word of the scribe Nebseni to be true against\line his enemies, even as thou didst make the word of Osiris to be true\line against his enemies, in the presence of the Tchatcha Chiefs who are\line with Ra and Osiris in Anu, on the night of the "things of the\line night," and the night of battle, and of the fettering of the Sebau\line fiends, and the day of the destruction of the enemies of Neb-er-tcher.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs in Anu are Tem, Shu, Tefnut, [Osiris\line and Thoth]. Now the "fettering of the Sebau fiends" signifieth the\line destruction of the Smaiu fiends of Set, when he wrought iniquity a\line second time.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris to be true against\line his enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris Ani to be true against\line his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Tetu, on the\line night of setting up the Tet in Tetu.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Tetu are Osiris, Isis,\line Nephthys, and Horus the avenger of his father. Now the "setting up\line of the Tet in Tetu" signifieth [the raising up of] the shoulder of\line Horus, the Governor of Sekhem. They are round about Osiris in the band\line [and] the bandages.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris to be true against\line his enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris Ani to be true against\line his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Sekhem, on\line the night of the "things of the night" in Sekhem.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Sekhem are\line Heru-khenti-en-ariti and Thoth who is with the Tchatcha Chiefs of\line Nerutef. Now the night of the "things of the night festival"\line signifieth the dawn on the sarcophagus of Osiris.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris to be true against\line his enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris the scribe Ani to be\line true against his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in\line the double town Pe-Tep, on the night of setting up the "Senti" of\line Horus, and of establishing him in the inheritance of the possessions\line of his father Osiris.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Pe-Tep are Horus, Isis,\line Kesta (Mesta) and Hapi. Now the "setting up of the 'Senti' of Horus"\line hath reference to the words which Set spake to his followers, saying\line "Set up the Senti."\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris to be true against\line his enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris the scribe Ani to be\line true, in peace, against his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs\line who are in the Lands of the Rekhti (Taiu-Rekhti), in the night when\line Isis lay down, and kept watch to make lamentation for her brother\line Osiris.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Taiu-Rekhti are Isis,\line Horus, Kesta (Mesta) [Anpu and Thoth].\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris true against his\line enemies, make thou the word of Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is\line truth, in peace, to be true against his enemies, with the great\line Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Abtu, on the night of the god Haker, when\line the dead are separated, and the spirits are judged, and when the\line procession taketh place in Teni.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Abtu are Osiris, Isis,\line and Up-uat.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris to be true against\line his enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris, the scribe and assessor\line of the sacred offerings which are made to all the gods, Ani, to be\line true against his enemies, with the Tchatcha Chiefs who examine the\line dead on the night of making the inspection of those who are to be\line annihilated.\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are present at the examination\line of the dead are Thoth, Osiris, Anpu and Asten (read Astes). Now the\line inspection (or, counting) of those who are to be annihilated\line signifieth the shutting up of things from the souls of the sons of\line revolt.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris true against his\line enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris the scribe Ani to be true\line against his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are present at\line the digging up of the earth [and mixing it] with their blood, and of\line making the word of Osiris to be true against his enemies.\line\line As concerning the Tchatcha Chiefs who are present at the digging\line up of the earth in Tetu: When the Smaiu fiends of Set came [there],\line having transformed themselves into animals, these Tchatcha Chiefs slew\line them in the presence of the gods who were there, and they took their\line blood, and carried it to them. These things were permitted at the\line examination [of the wicked] by those [gods] who dwelt in Tetu.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris to be true against\line his enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris [the scribe] Ani to be\line true against his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in\line Nerutef on the night of the "Hidden of Forms."\line\line Now the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Nerutef are Ra, Osiris, Shu\line and Bebi.\line Now, the night of the "Hidden of Forms" referreth to the placing\line on the sarcophagus [of Osiris] the arm, the heel, and the thigh of\line Osiris Un-Nefer.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris true against his\line enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris, whose word is truth, to\line be true against his enemies, with the great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in\line Rasta, on the night when Anpu lay with his arms on the things by\line Osiris, and when the word of Horus was make to be true against his\line enemies.\line\line The great Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Rasta are Horus, Osiris, and\line Isis. The heart of Osiris is happy, the heart of Horus is glad, and\line the two halves of Egypt (Aterti) are well satisfied thereat.\line Hail, Thoth, who didst make the word of Osiris true against his\line enemies, make thou the word of the Osiris the scribe Ani, the assessor\line of the holy offerings made to all the gods, to be true against his\line enemies, with the Ten great Tchatcha Chiefs who are with Ra, and\line with Osiris, and with every god, and with every goddess, in the\line presence of the god Nebertcher. He hath destroyed his enemies, and\line he hath destroyed every evil thing which appertained to him.\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be recited for, or over, the deceased, he\line shall come forth by day, purified after death, according to the desire\line of his heart. Now if this Chapter be recited over him, he shall\line progress over the earth, and he shall escape from every fire, and none\line of the evil things which appertain to him shall ever be round about\line him; never, a million times over, shall this be.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF OPENING THE MOUTH OF THE OSIRIS ANI. To be said:- The\line god Ptah shall open my mouth, and the god of my town shall unfasten\line the swathings, the swathings which are over my mouth. Thereupon\line shall come Thoth, who is equipped with words of power in great\line abundance, and shall untie the fetters, even the fetters of the god\line Set which are over my mouth. And the god Tem shall cast them back at\line those who would fetter me with them, and cast them at him. Then\line shall the god Shu open my mouth, and make an opening into my mouth\line with the same iron implement wherewith he opened the mouth of the\line gods. I am the goddess Sekhmet, and I take my seat upon the place by\line the side of Amt-ur the great wind of heaven. I am the great\line Star-goddess Saah, who dwelleth among the Souls of Anu. Now as\line concerning every spell, and every word which shall be spoken against\line me, every god of the Divine Company shall set himself in opposition\line thereto.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF BRINGING WORDS OF POWER TO THE OSIRIS ANI, who\line saith:- I am Tem-Khepera who produced himself on the thighs of his\line divine mother. Those who dwell in Nu have been made wolves, and those\line who are among the Tchatcha Chiefs have become hyenas. Behold, I will\line gather together to myself this charm from the person with whom it is\line [and from the place] wherein it is [and it shall come to me] quicker\line than a greyhound, and swifter that light. Hail, thou who bringest the\line Ferry-Boat of Ra, thou holdest thy course firmly and directly in the\line north wind as thou sailest up the river towards the Island of Fire\line which is in Khert-Neter. Behold, thou shalt gather together to thee\line this charm from wheresoever it may be, and from whomsoever it may be\line with [and it shall come to me] quicker than a greyhound, and swifter\line than light. It (the charm) made the transformations of Mut; it\line fashioned the gods [or] kept them silent; by it Mut gave the warmth\line [of life] to the gods. Behold, these words of power are mine, and\line they shall come unto me from wheresoever they may be, or with\line whomsoever they may be, quicker than greyhounds and swifter than\line light, or, according to another reading, "swifter than shadows."\line APPENDIX\line\line THE CHAPTER WHICH MAKETH A MAN TO REMEMBER HIS NAME IN\line KHERT-NETER. [The deceased] saith:- Let my name be given to me in\line the Great House (Per-ur), and let me remember my name in the House\line of Fire (Per Neser), on the night wherein the years are counted up,\line and the number of the months is told. I am dwelling with the Divine\line One, I take my seat on the eastern side of the sky. If any god\line cometh after me, I shall be able to declare his name forthwith.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF GIVING A HEART TO THE OSIRIS ANI IN KHERT-NETER. He\line saith:- Let my heart be with me in the House of Hearts. Let my\line heart-case be with me in the House of heart-cases. Let my heart be\line with me, and let it rest in [me or] I shall not eat the cakes of\line Osiris in the eastern side of the Lake of Flowers, nor have a boat\line wherein to float down the river, nor a boat to sail up the river to\line thee, nor be able to embark in a boat with thee. Let my mouth be to me\line that I may speak therewith. Let my legs be to me that I may walk\line therewith. Let my arms be to me that I may overthrow the foe\line therewith. Let the two doors of the sky be opened to me. May Keb,\line the Erpat of the gods, open his jaws to me. May he open my two eyes\line which are blinded by swathings. May he make me to lift up my legs in\line walking which are tied together. May Anpu make my thighs to become\line vigorous. May the goddess Sekhmet raise me, and lift me up. Let me\line ascend into heaven, let that which I command be performed in\line Het-ka-Ptah. I know how to use my heart. I am master of my heart-case.\line I am master of my hands and arms. I am master of my legs. I have the\line power to do that which my KA desireth to do. My Heart-soul shall not\line be kept a prisoner in my body at the gates of Amentet when I would\line go in in peace and come forth in peace.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF THE OSIRIS, THE ASSESSOR\line OF THE DIVINE OFFERINGS OF ALL THE GODS, ANI, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH\line BEFORE OSIRIS, BE DRIVEN BACK FROM HIM IN KHERT-NETER. He saith:- My\line heart of my mother. My heart of my mother. My heart-case of my\line transformations. Let not any one stand up to bear testimony against\line me. Let no one drive me away from the Tchatcha Chiefs. Let no one make\line thee to fall away from me in the presence of the Keeper of the\line Balance. Thou art my KA, the dweller in my body, the god Khnemu who\line makest sound my members. Mayest thou appear in the place of\line happiness whither we go. Let not make my name to stink Shenit\line Chiefs, who make men to be stable. [Let it be satisfactory unto us,\line and let the listening be satisfactory unto us, and let there be joy of\line heart to us at the weighing of words. Let not lies be told against\line me before the Great God, the Lord of Amentet. Verily, how great\line shalt thou be when thou risest up in triumph!]\line\line RUBRIC I: These words are to be said over a scarab of green stone\line encircled with a band of refined copper, and [having] a ring of\line silver; which shall be placed on the neck of the Khu (the deceased),\line etc.\line RUBRIC II (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 21): If this Chapter be\line known [by the deceased] he shall be declared a speaker of the truth\line both upon earth and in Khert-Neter, and he shall be able to perform\line every act which a living human being can perform. Now it is a great\line protection which hath been given by the god. This Chapter was found in\line the city of Khemenu upon the slab of ba, which was inlaid with\line [letters of] genuine lapis-lazuli, and was under the feet of [the\line statue] of the god, during the reign of His Majesty, the King of the\line South and North, Menkaura (Mycerinus), true of word, by Prince\line Herutataf, who found it during a journey which he made to inspect\line the temples. One Nekht was with him who was diligent in making him\line to understand it, and he brought it to the king as a wonderful\line object when he perceived that it was a thing of great mystery, [the\line like of] which had never [before] been seen or looked upon. This\line Chapter shall be recited by a man who is ceremonially clean and\line pure, who hath not eaten the flesh of animals, or fish, and who hath\line not had intercourse with women. And behold, thou shalt make a scarab\line of green stone, with a rim [plated] with gold, which shall be placed\line above the heart of a man, and it shall perform for him the "opening of\line the mouth." And thou shalt anoint it with myrrh unguent, and thou\line shalt recite over it the following words of magical power. [Here\line follows the text of the Chapter of Not Letting the Heart of Ani Be\line Taken from Him.]\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART-SOUL OF A MAN BE SNATCHED\line AWAY FROM HIM IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris the scribe Ani saith:--I,\line even I, am he who cometh forth from the Celestial Water (Akeb). He\line (Akeb) produced abundance for me, and hath the mastery there in the\line form of the River.\line\line (This is a portion of a longer Chapter which is included in the\line appendix.)\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (The following is from the Papyrus of Nefer-uben-f, Naville, op.\line cit., I, Bl. 72.)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF DRINKING WATER IN KHERT-NETER. The am khent priest,\line Nefer-uben-f, whose word is truth, saith:- I, even I, am he who cometh\line forth from the god Keb. The water-flood is given to him, he hath\line become the master thereof in the form of Hapi. I, the am khent\line Nefer-uben-f, open the doors of heaven. Thoth hath opened to me the\line doors of Qebh (the Celestial Waters). Lo, Hepi Hepi, the two sons of\line the Sky, mighty in splendour, grant ye that I may be master over the\line water, even as Set had dominion over his evil power on the day of\line the storming of the Two Lands. I pass by the Great Ones, arm to\line shoulder, even as they pass that Great God, the Spirit who is\line equipped, whose name is unknown. I have passed by the Aged One of\line the shoulder. I am Nefer-uben-f, whose word is truth. Hath opened to\line me the Celestial Water Osiris. Hath opened to me the Celestial Water\line Thoth-Hapi, the Lord of the horizon, in his name of "Thoth, cleaver of\line the earth." I am master of the water, as Set is master of his\line weapon. I sail over the sky, I am Ra, I am Ru. I am Sma. I have\line eaten the Thigh, I have seized the bone and flesh. I go round about\line the Lake of Sekhet-Ar. Hath been given to me eternity without limit.\line Behold, I am the heir of eternity, to whom hath been given\line everlastingness.\line\line\line (The following two Chapters are from the Papyrus of Nu, Sheets 7 and\line 12)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF DRINKING WATER AND OF NOT BEING BURNT UP BY FIRE\line [IN KHERT-NETER]. Nu saith:- Hail, Bull of Amentet! I am brought\line unto thee. I am the paddle of Ra wherewith he transported the Aged\line Gods. Let me neither be burnt up nor destroyed by fire. I am Beb,\line the firstborn son of Osiris, to whom every god maketh an offering in\line the temple of his Eye in Anu. I am the divine Heir, the Mighty One,\line the Great One, the Resting One. I have made my name to flourish.\line Deliverer, thou livest in me [every day].\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT BEING BOILED IN FIRE. Nu saith:- I am the\line paddle which is equipped, wherewith Ra transported the Aged Gods,\line which raised up the emissions of Osiris from the Lake of blazing fire,\line and he was not burned. I sit down like the Light-god, and like Khnemu,\line the Governor of lions. Come, cut away the fetters from him that\line passeth by the side of this path, and let me come forth therefrom.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF GIVING AIR IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- I\line am the Egg which dwelt in the Great Cackler. I keep ward over that\line great place which Keb hath proclaimed upon earth. I live; it liveth. I\line grow up, I live, I snuff the air. I am Utcha-aab. I go round about his\line egg [to protect it]. I have thwarted the moment of Set. Hail, Sweet\line one of the Two Lands! Hail, dweller in the tchefa food! Hail,\line dweller in the lapis-lazuli! Watch ye over him that is in his\line cradle, the Babe when he cometh forth to you.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 12)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF GIVING AIR TO NU IN KHERT-NETER. He saith:- Hail,\line thou God Temu, grant thou unto me the sweet breath which dwelleth in\line thy nostrils! I am the Egg which is in Kenken-ur (the Great\line Cackler), and I watch and guard that mighty thing which hath come into\line being, wherewith the god Keb hath opened the earth. I live; it liveth;\line I grow, I live, I snuff the air. I am the god Utcha-aabet, and I go\line about his egg. I shine at the moment of the mighty of strength,\line Suti. Hail, thou who makest sweet the time of the Two Lands! Hail,\line dweller among the celestial food. Hail, dweller among the beings of\line blue (lapis-lazuli), watch ye to protect him that is in his nest,\line the Child who cometh forth to you.\line\line\line THE CHAPTER OF GIVING AIR IN KHERT-NETER. Nu saith:- I am the jackal\line of jackals. I am Shu. I draw air from the presence of the Light-god,\line from the uttermost limits of heaven, from the uttermost limits of\line earth, from the uttermost limits of the pinion of Nebeh bird. May\line air be given unto this young divine Babe. [My mouth is open, I see\line with my eyes.]\line\line\line THE CHAPTER OF SNUFFING THE AIR WITH WATER IN KHERT-NETER. Hail,\line Tem. Grant thou unto me the sweet breath which dwelleth in thy\line nostrils. I am he who embraceth that great throne which is in the city\line of Unu. I keep watch over the Egg of Kenken-ur (the Great Cackler).\line I grow and flourish as it groweth and flourisheth. I live as it\line liveth. I snuff the air as it snuffeth the air.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF A MAN BE SNATCHED AWAY\line FROM HIM IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth,\line saith:- Get thee back, O messenger of every god! Art thou come to\line [snatch away] my heart-case which liveth? My heart-case which liveth\line shall not be given unto thee. [As] I advance, the gods hearken unto my\line propitiation [prayer] and they fall down on their faces [whilst]\line they are on their own land.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT ALLOWING THE HEART.... TO BE CARRIED AWAY DEAD IN\line KHERT-NETER. [Nu, whose word is truth, saith]:- My heart is with me,\line and it shall never come to pass that it be carried away. I am the Lord\line of Hearts, the slayer of the heart-case. I live in truth, I have my\line being therein. I am Horus, the Dweller in Hearts, [I am] in the\line Dweller in the body. I have life by my word, my heart hath being. My\line heart-case shall not be snatched away from me, it shall not be\line wounded, it shall not be put in restraint if wounds are inflicted upon\line me. [If] one take possession of it I shall have my being in the body\line of my father Keb and in the body of my mother Nut. I have not done\line that which is held in abomination by the gods. I shall not suffer\line defeat [for] my word is truth.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART-CASE OF A MAN BE TAKEN AWAY\line FROM HIM IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, ye who steal and\line crush heart-cases [and who make the heart of a man to go through its\line transformations according to his deeds: let not what he hath done harm\line him before you]. Homage to you, O ye Lords of Eternity, ye masters\line of everlastingness, take ye not this heart of Osiris Ani into your\line fingers, and this heart-case, and cause ye not things of evil to\line spring up against it, because this heart belongeth to the Osiris\line Ani, and this heart-case belongeth to him of the great names\line (Thoth), the mighty one, whose words are his members. He sendeth his\line heart to rule his body, and his heart is renewed before the gods.\line The heart of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is to him; he hath\line gained the mastery over it. He hath not said what he hath done. He\line hath obtained power over his own members. His heart obeyeth him, he is\line the lord thereof, it is in his body, and it shall never fall away\line therefrom. I command thee to be obedient unto me in Khert-Neter. I,\line the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace; whose word is truth\line in the Beautiful Amentet, by the Domain of Eternity.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 5)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF NU, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH,\line BE CARRIED AWAY FROM HIM IN KHERT-NETER. He saith:- Hail, thou\line Lion-god! I am Unb (the Blossom). That which is held in abomination to\line me is the block of slaughter of the god. Let not this my heart-case be\line carried away from me by the Fighting Gods in Anu. Hail, thou who\line dost wind bandages round Osiris, and who hast seen Set. Hail, thou who\line returnest after smiting and destroying him before the mighty ones!\line This my heart weepeth over itself before Osiris; it hath made\line supplication for me. I have given unto him and I have dedicated unto\line him the thoughts of the heart in the House of the god (Usekh-her),\line have brought unto him sand at the entry to Khemenu. Let not this my\line heart-case be carried away from me. I make you to ascend his throne,\line to fetter heart-cases for him in Sekhet-hetep, [to live] years of\line strength away from things of all kinds which are abominations to\line him, to carry off food from among the things which are thine, and\line which are in thy grasp through thy strength. And this my heart-case is\line devoted to the decrees of the god Tem, who guideth me through the\line caverns of Suti, but let not this my heart, which hath performed its\line desire before the Tchatcha Chiefs who are in Khert-Neter, be given\line to him. When they find the leg and the swathings they bury them.\line\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEART OF NU, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH,\line BE DRIVEN AWAY FROM HIM IN KHERT-NETER. He saith:- My heart of my\line mother. My heart of my mother. My heart-case of my existence upon\line the earth. Let no one stand up against me when I bear testimony in the\line presence of the Lords of Things. Let it not be said against me and\line of that which I have done "He hath committed acts which are opposed to\line what is right and true," and let not charges be brought up against\line me in the presence of the Great God, the Lord of Amentet. Homage to\line thee, O my heart (ab). Homage to thee, O my heart-case. Homage to you,\line O my reins. Homage to you, O ye gods, who are masters of [your]\line beards, and who are holy by reason of your sceptres. Speak ye for me\line words of good import to Ra, and make ye me to have favour in the sight\line of Nehebkau.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF BREATHING THE AIR AND OF HAVING POWER OVER WATER IN\line KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- Open to me! Who art thou?\line Whither goest thou? What is thy name? I am one of you. Who are these\line with you? The two Merti goddesses (Isis and Nephthys). Thou separatest\line head from head when [he] entereth the divine Mesqen chamber. He\line causeth me to set out for the temple of the gods Kem-heru.\line "Assembler of souls" is the name of my ferry-boat. "Those who make the\line hair to bristle" is the name of the oars. "Sert" ("Goad") is the\line name of the hold. "Steering straight in the middle" is the name of the\line rudder; likewise, [the boat] is a type of my being borne onward in the\line lake. Let there be given unto me vessels of milk, and cakes, and\line loaves of bread, and cups of drink, and flesh, in the Temple of Anpu.\line\line RUBRIC: If the deceased knoweth this Chapter, he shall go into,\line after coming forth from Khert-Neter of [the Beautiful Amentet].\line\line THE CHAPTER OF SNUFFING THE AIR, AND OF HAVING POWER OVER THE\line WATER IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, thou Sycamore\line tree of the goddess Nut! Give me of the [water and of the] air which\line is in thee. I embrace that throne which is in Unu, and I keep guard\line over the Egg of Nekek-ur. It flourisheth, and I flourish; it liveth,\line and I live; it snuffeth the air, and I snuff the air, I the Osiris\line Ani, whose word is truth, in [peace].\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND TIME IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris\line Ani saith:- My hiding place is opened, my hiding place is opened.\line The Spirits fall headlong in the darkness, but the Eye of Horus hath\line made me holy, and Upuati hath nursed me. I will hide myself among you,\line O ye stars which are imperishable. My brow is like the brow of Ra.\line My face is open. My heart-case is upon its throne, I know how to utter\line words. In very truth I am Ra himself. I am not a man of no account.\line I am not a man to whom violence can be done. Thy father liveth for\line thee, O son of Nut. I am thy son, O great one, I have seen the\line hidden things which are thine. I am crowned upon my throne like the\line king of the gods. I shall not die a second time in Khert-Neter.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT ROTTING IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:-\line O thou who art motionless, O thou who art motionless, O thou whose\line members are motionless, like unto those of Osiris. Thy members shall\line not be motionless, they shall not rot, they shall not crumble away,\line they shall not fall into decay. My members shall be made [permanent]\line for me as if I were Osiris.\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be known by the deceased he shall never\line see corruption in Khert-Neter.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 18)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE BODY PERISH. The Osiris Nu saith:-\line Homage to thee, O my divine father Osiris! I come to embalm thee. Do\line thou embalm these my members, for I would not perish and come to an\line end [but would be] even like unto my divine father Khepera, the divine\line type of him that never saw corruption. Come then, strengthen my\line breath, O Lord of the winds, who dost magnify these divine beings\line who are like unto thyself. Stablish me, stablish me, and fashion me\line strongly, O Lord of the funeral chest. Grant thou that I may enter\line into the land of everlastingness, according to that which was done for\line thee, along with thy father Tem, whose body never saw corruption,\line and who himself never saw corruption. I have never done that which\line thou hatest, nay, I have acclaimed thee among those who love thy KA.\line Let not my body become worms, but deliver thou me as thou didst\line deliver thyself. I pray thee, let me not fall into rottenness, as thou\line lettest every god, and every goddess, and every animal, and every\line reptile, see corruption, when the soul hath gone out of them, after\line their death.\line And when the soul hath departed, a man seeth corruption, and the\line bones of his body crumble away and become stinking things, and the\line members decay one after the other, the bones crumble into a helpless\line mass, and the flesh turneth into foetid liquid. Thus man becometh a\line brother unto the decay which cometh upon him, and he turneth into a\line myriad of worms, and he becometh nothing but worms, and an end is made\line of him, and perisheth in the sight of the god of day (Shu), even as do\line every god, and every goddess, and every bird, and every fish, and\line every creeping worm, and every reptile, and every beast, and every\line thing whatsoever. Let [all the Spirits fall] on their bellies [when]\line they recognize me, and behold, the fear of me shall terrify them;\line and thus also let it be with every being that hath died, whether it be\line animal, or bird, or fish, or worm, or reptile. Let life [rise out\line of] death. Let not the decay caused by any reptile make an end [of\line me], and let not [enemies] come against me in their various forms.\line Give thou me not over to the Slaughterer in this execution-chamber,\line who killeth the members, and maketh them rot, being [himself]\line invisible, and who destroyeth the bodies of the dead, and liveth by\line carnage. Let me live, and perform his order; I will do what is\line commanded by him. Give me not over to his fingers, let him not\line overcome me, for I am under thy command, O Lord of the Gods.\line Homage to thee, O my divine father Osiris, thou livest with thy\line members. Thou didst not decay, thou didst not become worms, thou didst\line not wither, thou didst not rot, thou didst not putrefy, thou didst not\line turn into worms. I am the god Khepera, and my members shall have being\line everlastingly. I shall not decay, I shall not rot, I shall not\line putrefy, I shall not turn into worms, and I shall not see corruption\line before the eye of the god Shu. I shall have my being, I shall have\line by being; I shall live, I shall live; I shall flourish, I shall\line flourish, I shall flourish, I shall wake up in peace, I shall not\line putrefy, my intestines shall not perish, I shall not suffer injury. My\line eye shall not decay. The form of my face shall not disappear. My ear\line shall not become deaf. My head shall not be separated from my neck. My\line tongue shall not be removed. My hair shall not be cut off. My eyebrows\line shall not be shaved away, and no evil defect shall assail me. My\line body shall be stablished. It shall neither become a ruin, nor be\line destroyed on this earth.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT PERISHING AND OF BEING ALIVE IN KHERT-NETER.\line The Osiris Ani saith:- Hail ye children of the god Shu. The Tuat\line hath gained the mastery over his diadem. Among the Hamemet Spirits may\line I arise, even as did arise Osiris.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT GOING IN TO THE BLOCK OF THE GOD. The Osiris\line Ani saith:- My head was fastened on my body in heaven, O Guardian of\line the Earth, by Ra. [This] was granted [to me] on the day of my being\line stablished, when I rose up out of a state of weakness upon [my] two\line feet. On the day of cutting off the hair Set and the Company of the\line Gods fastened my head to my neck, and it became as firm as it was\line originally. Let nothing happen to shake it off again! Make ye me\line safe from the murderer of my father. I have tied together the Two\line Earths. Nut hath fastened together the vertebrae of my neck, and [I]\line behold them as they were originally, and they are seen in the order\line wherein they were when as yet Maat was not seen, and when the gods\line were not born in visible forms. I am Penti. I am the heir of the great\line gods, I the Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT BEING TRANSPORTED TO THE EAST IN KHERT-NETER. The\line Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, Phallus of Ra, which advanceth and beateth\line down opposition. Things which have been without motion for millions of\line years have come into life through Baba. I am stronger thereby than the\line strong, and I have more power thereby than the mighty. Now, let me not\line be carried away in a boat, or be seized violently and taken to the\line East, to have the festivals of Sebau Devils celebrated on me. Let\line not deadly wounds be inflicted upon me, and let me not be gored by\line horns. Thou shalt neither fall [nor] eat fish made by Tebun.\line\line Now, no evil thing of any kind whatsoever shall be done unto me by\line the Sebau Devils. [I shall not be gored by] horns. Therefore the\line Phallus of Ra, [which is] the head of Osiris, shall not be swallowed\line up. Behold, I shall come into me fields and I shall cut the grain. The\line gods shall provide me with food. Thou shalt not then be gored,\line Ra-Khepera. There shall not be then pus in the Eye of Tem, and it\line shall not be destroyed. Violence shall not be done unto me, and I\line shall not be carried away in [my] boat to the East to have the\line festivals of the Sebau Devils celebrated on me in evil fashion.\line Cruel gashes with knives shall not be inflicted upon me, and I shall\line not be carried away in [my] boat to the East. I the Osiris, the\line assessor of the holy offerings of all the gods, Ani, whose word is\line truth, happily, the lord of fealty [to Osiris].\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE HEAD OF A MAN BE CUT OFF FROM HIS\line BODY IN KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- I am a Great One, the\line son of a Great One. [I am] Fire, the son of Fire, to whom was given\line his head after it had been cut off. The head of Osiris was not removed\line from his body, and the head of Osiris Ani shall not be removed from\line his body. I have knitted myself together, I have made myself whole and\line complete. I shall renew my youth. I am Osiris Himself, the Lord of\line Eternity.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE SOUL TO BE JOINED TO ITS BODY IN\line KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, thou god Aniu! Hail, thou\line god Pehreri, who dwellest in thy hall, the Great God. Grant thou\line that my soul may come to me from any place wherein it may be. Even\line if it would tarry, let my soul be brought unto me from any place\line wherein it may be. Thou findest the Eye of Horus standing by thee like\line unto those beings who resemble Osiris, who never lie down in death.\line Let not the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, lie down dead among those\line who lie in Anu, the land wherein [souls] are joined to their bodies in\line thousands. Let me have possession of my Ba-soul and of my Spirit-soul,\line and let my word be truth with it (the Ba-soul) in every place\line wherein it may be. Observe then, O ye guardians of Heaven, my soul\line [wherever it may be]. Even if it would tarry, cause thou my Ba-soul to\line see my body. Thou shalt find the Eye of Horus standing by thee like\line [the Watchers].\line Hail, ye gods who tow along the boat of the Lord of Millions of\line Years, who bring it over the sky of the Tuat, who make it to journey\line over Nent, who make Ba-souls to enter into their Spirit-bodies,\line whose hands hold the steering poles and guide it straight, who grasp\line tightly your paddles, destroy ye the Enemy; thus shall the Boat\line rejoice, and the Great God shall travel on his way in peace. Moreover,\line grant ye that the Ba-soul of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth\line before the gods, may come forth with your navel cords in the eastern\line part of the sky, and that it may follow Ra to the place where he was\line yesterday, and may set in peace, in peace in Amentet. May it gaze upon\line its earthly body, may it take up its abode and its Spirit-body, may it\line neither perish nor be destroyed for ever and for ever.\line\line RUBRIC: These words shall be said over a model of the Ba-soul made\line of gold, and inlaid with precious stones, which shall be placed on the\line breast of the Osiris.\line\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT LETTING THE SOUL OF A MAN BE HELD CAPTIVE IN\line KHERT-NETER. The Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, thou who art exalted!\line Hail, thou who art adored! Hail, Mighty One of Souls, thou divine Soul\line who inspirest great dread, who dost set the fear of thyself in the\line gods, who are enthroned upon thy mighty seat. Make thou a path for the\line Spirit-soul and the Ba-soul of the Osiris Ani. I am equipped with\line [words of power]. I am a Spirit-soul equipped with [words of power]. I\line have made my way to the place where are Ra and Hathor.\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be known by the deceased he shall be able to\line transform himself into a Spirit-soul who shall be equipped with [his\line soul and his shadow] in Khert-Neter, and he shall not be shut up\line inside any door in Amentet, when he is coming forth upon the Earth, or\line when he is going back into [Khert-Neter.]\line\line THE CHAPTER OF OPENING THE TOMB TO THE BA-SOUL AND THE SHADOW, AND\line OF COMING FORTH BY DAY, AND OF HAVING MASTERY OVER THE TWO LEGS. The\line Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- The place which is\line closed is opened, the place which is shut (or sealed) is sealed.\line That which lieth down in the closed place is opened by the Ba-soul\line which is in it. By the Eye of Horus I am delivered. Ornaments are\line stablished on the brow of Ra. My stride is made long. I lift up my two\line thighs [in walking]. I have journeyed over a long road. My limbs are\line in a flourishing condition. I am Horus, the Avenger of his Father, and\line I bring the Urrt Crown [and set it on] its standard. The road of souls\line is opened. My twin soul seeth the Great God in the Boat of Ra, on\line the day of souls. My soul is in the front thereof with the counter\line of the years. Come, the Eye of Horus hath delivered for me my soul, my\line ornaments are stablished on the brow of Ra. Light is on the faces of\line those who are in the members of Osiris. Ye shall not hold captive my\line soul. Ye shall not keep in durance my shadow. The way is open to my\line soul and to my shadow. It seeth the Great God in the shrine on the day\line of counting souls. It repeateth the words of Osiris. Those whose seats\line are invisible, who fetter the members of Osiris, who fetter\line Heart-souls and Spirit-souls, who set a seal upon the dead, and who\line would do evil to me, shall do no evil to me. Haste on the way to me.\line Thy heart is with thee. My Heart-soul and my Spirit-soul are equipped;\line they guide thee. I sit down at the head of the great ones who are\line chiefs of their abodes. The wardens of the members of Osiris shall not\line hold thee captive, though they keep ward over souls, and set a seal on\line the shadow which is dead. Heaven shall not shut thee in.\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be known by the deceased he shall come forth\line by day, and his soul shall not be kept captive.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papryus of Nebseni, Sheet 6)\line\line That which was shut hath been opened [that is] the dead. That\line which was shut fast hath been opened by the command of the Eye of\line Horus, which hath delivered me. Established are the beauties on the\line forehead of Ra. My steps are long. My legs are lifted up. I have\line performed the journey, my members are mighty and are sound. I am\line Horus, the Avenger of his Father. I am he who bringeth along his\line father, and his mother, by means of his staff. The way shall be opened\line to him that hath power over his feet, and he shall see the Great God\line in the Boat of Ra, when souls are counted therein at the bows, and\line when the years also are counted up. Grant that the Eye of Horus, which\line maketh the adornments of splendour to be firm on the forehead of Ra,\line may deliver my soul for me, and let darkness cover your faces, O ye\line who would imprison Osiris. O keep not captive my soul. O keep not ward\line over my shadow, but let a way be opened for my soul and my shadow, and\line let them see the Great God in the shrine on the day of the counting of\line souls, and let them hold converse with Osiris, whose habitations are\line hidden, and those who guard the members of Osiris, and who keep ward\line over the Spirit-souls, and who hold captive the shadows of the dead,\line and who would work evil against me, so that they shall [not] work evil\line against me. A way shall be for KA with thee, and thy soul shall be\line prepared by those who keep ward over the members of Osiris, and who\line hold captive the shadows of the dead. Heaven shall not keep thee fast,\line the earth shall not hold thee captive. Thou shalt not live with the\line beings who slay, but thou shalt be master of thy legs, and thou\line shalt advance to thy body straightway in the earth, [and to] those who\line belong to the shrine of Osiris and guard his members.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF LIFTING UP THE FEET, AND OF COMING FORTH ON THE\line EARTH. The Osiris Ani saith:- Perform thy work, O Seker, perform thy\line work, O Seker, O thou who dwellest in thy circle, and who dwellest\line in my feet in Khert-Neter. I am he who sendeth forth light over the\line Thigh of heaven. I come forth in heaven. I sit down by the Light-god\line (Khu). O I am helpless. O I am helpless. I would walk. I am\line helpless. I am helpless in the regions of those who plunder in\line Khert-Neter, I the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF FORCING A WAY INTO AMENTET [AND OF COMING FORTH] BY\line DAY. The Osiris Ani saith:- The town of Unu is opened. My head is\line sealed up, Thoth. Perfect is the Eye of Horus. I have delivered the\line Eye of Horus which shineth with splendours on the brow of Ra, the\line Father of the gods, [I am] that self-same Osiris, [the dweller in]\line Amentet. Osiris knoweth his day, and he knoweth that he shall live\line through his period of life; I shall have by being with him. I am the\line Moon-god Aah, the dweller among the gods. I shall not come to an\line end. Stand up therefore, O Horus, for thou art counted among the gods.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (Naville, op. cit., I, Bl. X)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF FORCING A WAY INTO THE TUAT. The Am Khent priest\line Nefer-uben-f, whose word is truth, saith:- Hail, Soul, thou mighty one\line of terror. Behold, I have come unto thee. I see thee. I have forced\line a way through the Tuat. I see my father Osiris. I drive away the\line darkness. I love him. I have come. I see my father Osiris. He hath\line counted the heart of Set. I have made offerings for my father\line Osiris. I have opened all the ways in heaven and on earth. I love him.\line I have come. I have become a Spirit-body and a Spirit-soul, who is\line equipped. Hail, every god and every Spirit-soul, I have made the ways.\line I am Thoth....\line\line\line ANOTHER CHAPTER OF THE TUAT AND OF COMING FORTH BY DAY.\line\line Open is the land of Unu. Shut is the head of Thoth. Perfect is the\line Eye of Horus. I have delivered the Eye of Horus, the shining one,\line the ornament of the Eye of Ra, the Father of the Gods. I am that\line same Osiris who dwelleth in Amentet. Osiris knoweth his day, which\line cometh to an end. I am Set, the Father of the Gods. I shall never come\line to an end.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY AND OF LIVING AFTER DEATH. The\line Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, thou One, who shinest from the moon. Hail,\line thou One, who shinest from the moon. Grant that this Osiris Ani may\line come forth among thy multitudes who are at the portal. Let him be with\line the Light-God. Let the Tuat be opened to him. Behold, the Osiris Ani\line shall come forth by day to perform everything which he wisheth upon\line the earth among those who are living [thereon].\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 13)\line\line Hail, thou god Tem, who comest forth from the Great Deep, who\line shinest gloriously under the form of the twin Lion-gods, send forth\line with might thy words unto those who are in thy presence, and let the\line Osiris Nu enter into their assembly. He hath performed the decree\line which hath been spoken to the mariners at eventide, and the Osiris Nu,\line whose word is truth, shall live after his death, even as doth Ra every\line day. Behold, most certainly Ra was born yesterday, and the Osiris Nu\line was born yesterday. And every god shall rejoice in the life of the\line Osiris Nu, even as they rejoice in the life of Ptah, when he appeareth\line from the Great House of the Aged One which is in Anu.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH BY DAY AFTER FORCING AN ENTRANCE THROUGH\line THE AAMHET. The Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, Soul, thou mighty one of\line terror! Verily, I am here. I have come. I behold thee. I have passed\line through the Tuat. I have seen Father Osiris. I have scattered the\line gloom of night. I am his beloved one. I have come, I have seen my\line Father Osiris. I have stabbed the heart of Suti. I have made offerings\line to my Father Osiris. I have opened every way in heaven and on the\line earth. I am the son who loveth his Fathers (sic) Osiris. I am a\line Spirit-body. I am a Spirit-soul. I am equipped. Hail, every god and\line every Spirit-soul. I have made the way [to Osiris]. I the Osiris the\line scribe Ani, whose word is truth.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF MAKING A MAN TO RETURN TO LOOK UPON HIS HOUSE ON\line EARTH. The Osiris Ani saith:- I am the Lion-god who cometh forth\line with long strides. I have shot arrows, and I have wounded my prey. I\line have shot arrows, and I have wounded my prey. I am the Eye of Horus, I\line traverse the Eye of Horus at this season. I have arrived at the\line domains. Grant that the Osiris Ani may come in peace.\line\line ANOTHER CHAPTER OF THE COMING FORTH OF A MAN BY DAY AGAINST HIS\line ENEMIES IN KHERT-NETER. [The Osiris Ani saith:-] I have divided the\line heavens. I have cleft the horizon. I have traversed the earth\line [following in] his footsteps. I have conquered the mighty Spirit-souls\line because I am equipped for millions of years with words of power. I eat\line with my mouth. I evacuate with my body. Behold, I am the God of the\line Tuat! Let these things be given unto me, the Osiris Ani, in perpetuity\line withou fail or diminution.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 21)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF COMING FORTH AGAINST ENEMIES IN KHERT-NETER. The\line Osiris Nu saith:- Hail, Am-a-f (Eater of his arm), I have passed\line over the road. I am Ra. I have come forth from the horizon against\line my enemies. I have not permitted him to escape from me. I have\line stretched out my hand like that of the Lord of the Urrt Crown. I\line have lifted up my feet even as the Uraei-goddesses lift themselves up.\line I have not permitted the enemy [to be saved] from me. As for mine\line enemy, he hath been given to me, and he shall not be delivered from\line me. I stand up like Horus. I sit down like Ptah. I am strong like\line Thoth. I am mighty like Tem. I walk with my legs. I speak with my\line mouth. I chase my enemy. He hath been given unto me, and he shall\line not be delivered from me.\line\line A HYMN OF PRAISE TO RA WHEN HE RISETH UPON THE HORIZON, AND WHEN\line HE SETTETH IN THE LAND OF LIFE. Osiris the scribe Ani saith:- Homage\line to thee, O Ra, when thou risest as Tem-Heru-Khuti. Thou art to be\line adored. Thy beauties are before mine eyes, [thy] radiance is upon my\line body. Thou goest forth to thy setting in the Sektet Boat with [fair]\line winds, and thy heart is glad; the heart of the Matet Boat rejoiceth.\line Thou stridest over the heavens in peace, and all thy foes are cast\line down; the stars which never rest sing hymns of praise unto thee, and\line the stars which are imperishable glorify thee as thou sinkest to\line rest in the horizon of Manu, O thou who art beautiful at morn and at\line eve, O thou lord who livest, and art established, O my Lord!\line Homage to thee, O thou who art Ra when thou risest, and who art\line Tem when thou settest in beauty. Thou risest and thou shinest on the\line back of thy mother [Nut], O thou who art crowned the king of the gods!\line Nut welcometh thee, and payeth homage unto thee, and Maat, the\line everlasting and never-changing goddess, embraceth thee at noon and\line at eve. Thou stridest over the heavens, being glad at heart, and the\line Lake of Testes is content. The Sebau-fiend hath fallen to the\line ground, his fore-legs and his hind-legs have been hacked off him,\line and the knife hath severed the joints of his back. Ra hath a fair\line wind, and the Sektet Boat setteth out on its journey, and saileth on\line until it cometh into port. The gods of the South, the gods of the\line North, the gods of the West, and the gods of the East praise thee, O\line thou Divine Substance, from whom all living things came into being.\line Thou didst send forth the word when the earth was submerged with\line silence, O thou Only One, who didst dwell in heaven before ever the\line earth and the mountains came into being. Hail, thou Runner, Lord, Only\line One, thou maker of the things that are, thou hast fashioned the tongue\line of the Company of the Gods, thou hast produced whatsoever cometh forth\line from the waters, thou springest up out of them above the submerged\line land of the Lake of Horus. Let me breathe the air which cometh forth\line from thy nostrils, and the north wind which cometh forth from thy\line mother Nut. Make thou my Spirit-soul to be glorious, O Osiris, make\line thou my Heart-soul to be divine. Thou art worshipped as thou\line settest, O Lord of the gods, thou art exalted by reason of thy\line wondrous works. Shine thou with the rays of light upon my body day\line by day, upon me, Osiris the scribe, the assessor of the divine\line offerings of all the gods, the overseer of the granary of the Lords of\line Abydos, the real royal scribe who loveth thee, Ani, whose word is\line truth, in peace.\line Praise be unto thee, O Osiris, the Lord of Eternity, Un-Nefer,\line Heru-Khuti (Harmakhis), whose forms are manifold, whose attributes are\line majestic [Praise be unto thee], O thou who art Ptah-Seker-Tem in\line Anu, thou Lord of the hidden shrine, thou Creator of the House of\line the KA of Ptah (Het-ka-Ptah) and of the gods [therein], thou Guide\line of the Tuat, who art glorified when thou settest in Nu (the Sky). Isis\line embraceth thee in peace, and she driveth away the fiends from the\line entrances of thy paths. Thou turnest thy face towards Amentet, and\line thou makest the earth to shine as with refined copper. Those who\line have lain down in death rise up to see thee, they breathe the air, and\line they look upon thy face when the disk riseth on the horizon. Their\line hearts are at peace since they behold thee, o thou who art Eternity\line and Everlastingness.\line THE SOLAR LITANY\line\line Homage to you, O ye gods of the Dekans in Anu, and to you, O ye\line Hememet-spirits in Kher Aha, and to thee, O Unti, who art the most\line glorious of all the gods who are hidden in Anu,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O An in Antes, Heru-khuti, who dost with long\line strides march across the heavens,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O Everlasting Soul, thou Soul who dwellest in\line Tetu, Un-Nefer, the son of Nut, who art the Lord of Akert,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have done\line aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee in thy dominion over Tetu, upon whose brow the Urrt\line Crown is established, thou One who createst the strength to protect\line thyself, and who dwellest in peace,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O Lord of the Acacia Tree, whose Seker Boat is set\line upon its sledge, who turnest back the Fiend, the Evildoer, and dost\line cause the Eye of Ra (utchat) to rest upon its seat,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O thou who art mighty in thine hour, thou great\line and mighty Prince who dost dwell in Anrutef, thou Lord of Eternity and\line Creator of the Everlastingness, thou Lord of Hensu,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O thou who restest upon Truth, thou Lord of Abtu,\line whose limbs form the substance of Ta-tchesert, unto whom fraud and\line deceit are abominations,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O thou who dwellest in thy boat, who dost bring Hapi\line (the Nile) forth from his cavern, whose body is the light, and who\line dwellest in Nekhen,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line\line Homage to thee, O thou Creator of the gods, thou King of the South\line and North, Osiris, whose word is truth, who rulest the world by thy\line gracious goodness, thou Lord of the Atebui,\line O grant thou unto me a path whereover I may pass in peace, for I\line am just and true; I have not spoken falsehood wittingly, nor have I\line done aught with deceit.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Saite Recension, ed. Lepsius, Bl. V)\line\line Homage to thee, O thou who comest as Tem, who didst come into\line being to create the Company of the Gods.\line Homage to thee, O thou who comest as the Soul of Souls, the Holy One\line in Amentet.\line Homage to thee, O President of the Gods, who illuminest the Tuat\line with thy beauties.\line Homage to thee, O thou who comest as the Light-god, who travellest\line in thy Disk.\line Homage to thee, O thou greatest of all gods, who are crowned King in\line heaven, Governor in the Tuat.\line Homage to thee, O thou who makest a way through the Tuat, who dost\line lead the way through all doors.\line Homage to thee, O thou who art among the gods, who dost weigh\line words in Khert-Neter.\line Homage to thee, O thou who dwellest in thy secret places, who dost\line fashion the Tuat with thy might.\line Homage to thee, O great one, O mighty one, thine enemies have fallen\line in places where they were smitten.\line Homage to thee, O thou who hast hacked the Sebau-fiends in pieces,\line and hast annihilated Aapep.\line Grant thou the sweet breeze of the north wind to the Osiris\line Auf-ankh, whose word is truth.\line\line A HYMN OF PRAISE TO RA WHEN HE RISETH IN THE EASTERN PART OF HEAVEN.\line Those who are in his following rejoice, and the Osiris, the scribe\line Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- Hail, thou Disk, thou lord of\line rays, who risest on the horizon day by day. Shine thou with thy\line beams of light upon the face of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth,\line for he singeth hymns of praise to thee at dawn, and he maketh thee\line to sit at eventide [with words of adoration]. May the soul of the\line Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, come forth with thee into heaven! May\line he set out with thee in the Matet Boat [in the morning], may he come\line into port in the Sektet Boat [in the evening], and may he cleave his\line path among the stars of heaven which never rest.\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, being at peace [with his\line god], maketh adoration to his Lord, the Lord of Eternity, and\line saith:- Homage to thee, O Heru-khuti, who art the god Khepera, the\line self-created. When thou risest on the horizon and sheddest thy beams\line of light upon the Lands of the South and of the North, thou art\line beautiful, yea beautiful, and all the gods rejoice when they behold\line thee, the king of heaven. The goddess, the Lady of the Hour, is\line stablished upon thy head, her Uraei of the South and of the North\line are upon thy brow, and she taketh up her place before thee. The god\line Thoth is stablished in the bows of thy boat to destroy utterly all thy\line foes. Those who dwell in the Tuat come forth to meet thee, and they\line bow to the earth in homage as they come towards thee, to look upon thy\line beautiful Form. And I, Ani, have come into thy presence, so that I may\line be with thee, and may behold thy Disk every day. Let me not be kept\line captive [by the tomb], and let me not be turned back [on my way].\line Let the members of my body be made new again when I contemplate thy\line beauties, even as are the members of all thy favoured ones, because\line I am one of those who worshipped thee upon earth. Let me arrive in the\line Land of Eternity, let me enter into the Land of Everlastingness. This,\line O my Lord, behold thou shalt ordain for me.\line AND MOREOVER, THE OSIRIS ANI, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH, IN PEACE, THE\line TRUTH-SPEAKER, SAITH:- Homage to thee, O thou who risest on thy\line horizon in the form of Ra, who restest upon Law, [which can neither be\line changed nor altered]. Thou passest over the sky, and every face,\line watcheth thee and thy course, for thou thyself art hidden from their\line gaze. Thou dost show thyself [to them] at dawn and at eventide each\line day. The Sektet Boat, wherein Thy Majesty dwelleth, setteth forth on\line its journey with vigour. Thy beams [fall] upon all faces, thy light\line with its manifold colours is incomprehensible [to man], and thy\line brilliant rays cannot be reported. The Lands of the Gods see thee,\line they could write [concerning thee]; the Deserts of Punt could count\line thee. Thy creation is hidden. It is one by the opening of thy mouth.\line Thy form is the head of Nu. May he (Ani) advance, even as thou dost\line advance, without cessation, even as Thy Majesty [ceaseth not to\line advance] even for a moment. With great strides thou dost in one little\line moment pass over limitless distances which would need millions and\line hundreds of thousands of years [for a man to pass over; this] thou\line doest, and then thou sinkest to rest. Thou bringest to an end the\line hours of the night, even as thou stridest over them. Thou bringest\line them to an end by thine own ordinance, and dawn cometh on the earth.\line Thou settest thyself before thy handiwork in the form of Ra, and\line thou rollest up on the horizon....... Thou sendest forth light when\line thy form raiseth itself up, thou ordainest the increase of thy\line splendours. Thou mouldest thy limbs as thou advancest, thou bringest\line them forth, thou who wast never brought forth, in the form of Ra,\line who rolleth up into the height of heaven. Grant thou that I may\line reach the heaven of eternity, and the region where thy favoured ones\line dwell. May I unite with those holy and perfect Spirit-souls of\line Khert-Neter. May I come forth with them to behold thy beauties as thou\line rollest on at eventide, as thou journeyest to thy mother Nut (the\line Night-sky), and dost place thyself at the right hand (in the West). My\line two hands are raised to thee in praise and thanksgiving when thou\line settest in life. Behold, thou art the Creator of Eternity, who art\line adored when thou settest in Nu. I have set thee in my heart, without\line wavering, O thou who art more divine than the gods.\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- Praise and thanksgiving\line be unto thee, O thou who rollest on like unto gold, thou Illuminer\line of the Two Lands on the day of thy birth. Thy mother brought thee\line forth on her hand, and thou didst light up with splendour the circle\line which is travelled over by the Disk. O Great Light who rollest\line across Nu, thou dost raise up the generations of men from the deep\line source of thy waters, and dost make to keep festivals all districts\line and cities, and all habitations. Thou protectest [them] with thy\line beauties. Thy KA riseth up with the celestial food hu and tchefau. O\line thou mightily victorious one, thou Power of Powers, who makest\line strong thy throne against the sinful ones, whose risings on thy throne\line in the Sektet Boat are mighty, whose strength is widespread in the\line Atett Boat, make thou the Osiris Ani to be glorious by virtue of his\line word, which is truth, in Khert-Neter. Grant thou that he may be in\line Amentet free from evil, and let [his] offences be [set] behind thee.\line Grant thou that he may [live there] a devoted slave of the\line Spirit-souls. Let him mingle among the Heart-souls who live in\line Ta-tchesert (the Holy Land). Let him travel about in the Sekhet-Aaru\line (the Elysian Fields), conformably to [thy] decree with joy of heart-\line him the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth.\line [And the god maketh answer]:--Thou shalt come forth into heaven,\line thou shalt sail over the sky, and thou shalt hold loving intercourse\line with the Star-gods. Praises shall be made to thee in the Boat. Thy\line name shall be proclaimed in the Atett Boat. Thou shalt look upon Ra\line within his shrine. Thou shalt make the Disk to set [with prayer] every\line day. Thou shalt see the Ant Fish in his transformations in the\line depths of the waters of turquoise. Thou shalt see the Abtu Fish in his\line time. It shall be that the Evil One shall fall when he deviseth a plan\line to destroy thee, and the joints of his neck and back shall be hacked\line asunder. Ra saileth with a fair wind, and the Sektet Boat\line progresseth and cometh into port. The mariners of Ra rejoice, and\line the heart of the Lady of the Hour is glad, for the enemy of her Lord\line hath been cast to the ground. Thou shalt behold Horus standing on\line the pilot's place in the Boat, and Thoth and Maat shall stand one on\line each side of him. All the gods shall rejoice when they behold Ra\line coming in peace to make the hearts of the Spirit-souls to live, and\line the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, the assessor of the holy\line offerings of the Lords of Thebes, shall be with them!\line THE CHAPTER OF THE NEW MOON\line\line THE FOLLOWING IS TO BE RECITED ON THE DAY OF THE MONTH (NEW MOON\line DAY). The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, in peace,\line whose word is truth, saith:- Ra ascendeth his throne on his horizon,\line and the Company of his Gods follow in his train. The God cometh\line forth from his hidden place, [and] tchefau food falleth from the\line eastern horizon of heaven at the word of Nut. They (the gods)\line rejoice over the paths of Ra, the Great Ancestor [as] he journeyeth\line round about. Therefore art thou exalted, O Ra, the dweller in thy\line Shrine. Thou swallowest the winds, thou drawest into thyself the north\line wind, thou eatest up the flesh of thy seat on the day when thou\line breathest truth. Thou dividest [it among] the gods who are [thy]\line followers. [Thy] Boat saileth on travelling among the Great Gods at\line thy word. Thou countest thy bones, thou gatherest together thy\line members, thou settest thy face towards Beautiful Amentet, and thou\line comest there, being made new every day. Behold, thou art that Image of\line Gold, thou hast the unitings of the disks of the sky, thou hast\line quakings, thou goest round about, and art made new each day. Hail!\line There is rejoicing in the horizon! The gods who dwell in the sky\line descend the ropes [of thy Boat] when they see the Osiris Ani, whose\line word is truth, they ascribe praise unto him as unto Ra. The Osiris Ani\line is a Great Chief. [He] seeketh the Urrt Crown. His provisions are\line apportioned to him- the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth. [His] fate is\line strong from the exalted body of the Aamu gods, who are in the presence\line of Ra. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is strong on the earth and\line in Khert-Neter. O Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, wake up, and be\line strong like unto Ra every day. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth,\line shall not tarry, he shall not remain motionless in this land for ever.\line Right well shall he see with his two eyes, right well shall he hear\line with his two ears, the things which are true, the things which are\line true. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is in Anu, the Osiris\line Ani, whose word is truth, is as Ra, and he is exalted by reason of\line [his] oars among the Followers of Nu. The Osiris Ani, whose word is\line truth, cannot tell what he hath seen [or] narrate [what he hath heard]\line in the House of the God of Mysteries. Hail! Let there be shouts of\line acclamation of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, the divine body of\line Ra in the Boat of Nu, who beareth propitiatory offerings for the KA of\line the god of that which he loveth. The Osiris Ani, whose word is\line truth, in peace, whose word is truth, is like Horus, the mighty one of\line transformations.\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter is to be recited over a boat seven cubits long,\line made of green stone of the Tchatchau. Make a heaven of stars, and\line purify it and cleanse it with natron and incense. Make then a figure\line of Ra upon a tablet of new stone in paint, and set it in the bows of\line the boat. Then make a figure of the deceased whom thou wilt make\line perfect, [and place it] in the boat. Make it to sail in the Boat of\line Ra, and Ra himself shall look upon it. Do not these things in the\line presence of any one except thyself, or thy father, or thy son. Then\line let them keep guard over their faces, and they shall see the\line deceased in Khert-Neter in the form of a messenger of Ra.\line\line A HYMN TO RA [WHICH IS TO BE SUNG] ON THE DAY OF THE MONTH (THE\line DAY OF THE NEW MOON) [WHEN] THE BOAT OF RA SAILETH. [The Osiris the\line scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:-] Homage to thee, O thou who\line dwellest in thy Boat. Thou rollest on, thou rollest on, thou sendest\line forth light, thou sendest forth light. Thou decreest rejoicing for\line [every] man for millions of years unto those who love him. Thou givest\line [thy] face to the Hememet spirits, thou god Khepera who dwellest in\line thy Boat. Thou hast overthrown the Fiend Aapep. O ye Sons of Keb,\line overthrow ye the enemies of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, and\line the fiends of destruction who would destroy the Boat of Ra. Horus hath\line cut off your heads in heaven. Ye who were in the forms of geese,\line your navel strings are on the earth. The animals are set upon the\line earth..... in the form of fish. Every male fiend and every female\line fiend shall be destroyed by the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth.\line Whether the fiends descend from out of heaven, or whether they come\line forth from the earth, or whether they advance on the waters, or\line whether they come from among the Star-gods, Thoth, [the son of\line Aner], coming forth from Anerti shall hack them to pieces. And the\line Osiris Ani shall make them silent and dumb. And behold ye, this god,\line the mighty one of slaughters, the terror of whom is most great,\line shall wash himself clean in your blood, and he shall bathe in your\line gore, and ye shall be destroyed by the Osiris Ani in the Boat of his\line Lord Ra-Horus. The heart of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, shall\line live. His mother Isis giveth birth to him, and Nephthys nurseth him,\line just as Isis gave birth to Horus, and Nephthys nursed him. [He]\line shall repulse the Smait fiends of Suti. They shall see the Urrt\line Crown stablished upon his head, and they shall fall down upon their\line faces [and worship him]. Behold, O ye Spirit-souls, and men, and gods,\line and ye dead, when ye see the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in the\line form of Horus, and the favoured one of the Urrt Crown, fall ye down\line upon your faces. The word of the Osiris Ani is truth before his\line enemies in heaven above, and on earth beneath, and before the\line Tchatchau Chiefs of every god and of every goddess.\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter shall be recited over a large hawk standing\line upright with the White Crown upon his head, [and over figures of] Tem,\line Shu, Tefnut, Keb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, [Suti] and Nephthys. And they\line shall be painted in colour upon a new tablet, which shall be placed in\line a boat, together with a figure of the deceased. Anoint them with heken\line oil, and offer unto them burning incense, and geese, and joints of\line meat roasted. It is an act of praise to Ra as he journeyeth in his\line boat, and it will make a man to have his being with Ra, and to\line travel with him wheresoever he goeth, and it will most certainly cause\line the enemies of Ra to be slain. And the Chapter of travelling shall\line be recited on the sixth day of the festival.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Turin Papyrus)\line\line ANOTHER CHAPTER WHICH IS TO BE RECITED WHEN THE MOON RENEWETH ITSELF\line ON THE DAY OF THE MONTH [WHEREON IT DOETH THIS]. Osiris unfettereth\line the storm-cloud in the body of heaven, and is unfettered himself;\line Horus is made strong happily each day. He whose transformations are\line many hath had offerings made unto him at the moment, and he hath\line made an end of the storm which is in the face of the Osiris, Auf-ankh,\line whose word is truth. Verily, he cometh, and he is Ra in journeying,\line and he is the four celestial gods in the heavens above. The Osiris\line Auf-ankh, whose word is truth, cometh forth in his day, and he\line embarketh among the tackle of the boat.\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be known by the deceased he shall become a\line perfect Spirit-soul in Khert-Neter, and he shall not die a second\line time, and he shall eat his food side by side with Osiris. If this\line Chapter be known by the deceased upon earth, he shall become like unto\line Thoth, and he shall be adored by those who live. He shall not fall\line headlong at the moment of the intensity of the royal flame of the\line goddess Bast, and the Great Prince shall make him to advance happily.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF ADVANCING TO THE TCHATCHAU CHIEFS OF OSIRIS. The\line Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I have built a house for my\line Ba-soul in the sanctuary in Tetu. I sow seed in the town of Pe (Buto).\line I have ploughed the fields with my labourers. My palm tree [standeth\line upright and is] like Menu upon it. I abominate abominable things. I\line will not eat the things which are abominations unto me. What I\line abominate is filth: I will not eat it. I shall not be destroyed by the\line offerings of propitiation and the sepulchral meals. I will not\line approach filth [to touch it] with my hands, I will not tread upon it\line with my sandals. For my bread shall be made of the white barley, and\line my ale shall be made from the red grain of the god Hapi (the\line Nile-god), which the Sektet Boat and the Atett Boat shall bring\line [unto me], and I will eat my food under the leaves of the trees\line whose beautiful arms I myself do know. O what splendour shall the\line White Crown make for me which shall be lifted up on me by the\line Uraei-goddesses! O Doorkeeper of Sehetep-taui, bring thou to me that\line wherewith the cakes of propitiation are made. Grant thou to me that\line I may lift up the earth. May the Spirit-souls open to me [their] arms,\line and let the Company of the Gods hold their peace whilst the Hememet\line spirits hold converse with the Osiris Ani. May the hearts of the\line gods lead him in his exalted state into heaven among the gods who\line appear in visible forms. If any god, or any goddess, attack the Osiris\line Ani, whose word is truth, when he setteth out, the Ancestor of the\line year who liveth upon hearts [Osiris] shall eat him when he cometh\line forth from Abydos, and the Ancestors of Ra shall reckon with him,\line and the Ancestors of Light shall reckon with him. [He is] a god of\line splendour [arrayed in] the apparel of heaven, and he is among the\line Great Gods. Now the subsistence of the Osiris Ani, whose word is\line truth, is among the cakes and the ale which are made for your\line mouths. I enter in by the Disk, I come forth by the god Ahui. I\line shall hold converse with the Followers of the Gods. I shall hold\line converse with the Disk. I shall hold converse with the\line Hememet-spirits. He shall set the terror of me in the thick\line darkness, in the inside of the goddess Mehurt, by the side of his\line forehead. Behold, I shall be with Osiris, and my perfection shall be\line his perfection among the Great Gods. I shall speak unto him with the\line words of men, I shall listen, and he shall repeat to me the words of\line the gods. I, the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace, have\line come equipped. Thou makest to approach [thee] those who love thee. I\line am a Spirit-soul who is better equipped than any [other] Spirit-soul.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO A SWALLOW. The\line Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I am a swallow, [I am] a\line swallow. [I am] that Scorpion, the daughter of Ra. Hail, O ye gods\line whose odour is sweet. Hail, O ye gods whose odour is sweet. Hail,\line Flame, who comest forth from the horizon. Hail, thou who art in the\line city. I have brought the Warder of his corner there. Give me thy two\line hands, and let me pass my time in the Island of Flame. I have advanced\line with a message, I have come having the report thereof [to make].\line Open to me. How shall I tell that which I have seen there? I am like\line Horus, the governor of the Boat, when the throne of his father was\line given unto him, and when Set, that son of Nut, was [lying] under the\line fetters which he had made for Osiris. He who is in Sekhem hath\line inspected me. I stretch out my arms over Osiris. I have advanced for\line the examination, I have come to speak there. Let me pass on and\line deliver my message. I am he who goeth in, [I am] judged, [I] come\line forth magnified at the Gate of Nebertcher. I am purified at the\line Great Uart. I have done away my wickednesses. I have put away\line utterly my offences. I have put away utterly all the taints of evil\line which appertained to me [upon the earth]. I have purified myself, I\line have made myself to be like a god. Hail, O ye Doorkeepers, I have\line completed my journey. I am like unto you. I have come forth by day.\line I have advanced on my legs. I have gained the master over [my]\line footsteps. [Hail, ye] Spirit-souls! I, even I, do know the hidden\line roads and the Gates of Sekhet Aaru. I live there. Verily, I, even I,\line have come, I have overthrown my enemies upon the earth, although my\line body lieth a mummy in the tomb.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line\line RUBRIC: (Naville, op. cit., II, Bl. 202)\line If this Chapter be known by the deceased, he shall enter in after he\line hath come forth by day.\line\line RUBRIC: (Saite Recension)\line If this Chapter be known by the deceased, he shall come forth by day\line from Khert-Neter, and he shall go [again] after he hath come forth. If\line this Chapter be not known [by the deceased], he shall not go in\line again after he hath come forth [and he] shall not know [how] to come\line forth by day.\line\line [THE CHAPTER] OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO A HAWK OF GOLD.\line The Osiris Ani saith:- I have risen up out of the seshett chamber,\line like the golden hawk which cometh forth from his egg. I fly, I\line alight like a hawk with a back of seven cubits, and the wings of which\line are like unto the mother-of-emerald of the South. I have come forth\line from the Sektet Boat, and my heart hath been brought unto me from\line the mountain of the East. I have alighted on the Atet Boat, and\line there have been brought unto me those who dwelt in their substance,\line and they bowed in homage before me. I have risen, I have gathered\line myself together like a beautiful golden hawk, with the head of the\line Benu, and Ra hath entered in [to hear my speech]. I have taken my seat\line among the great gods, [the children of] Nut. I have settled myself,\line the Sekhet-hetepet (the Field of Offerings) is before me. I eat\line therein, I become a Spirit-soul therein, I am supplied with food in\line abundance therein, as much as I desire. The Grain-god (Nepra) hath\line given unto me food for my throat, and I am master over myself and over\line the attributes of my head.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO A DIVINE HAWK. The\line Osiris Ani saith:- Hail, thou Great God, come thou to Tetu. Make\line thou ready for me the ways, and let me go round [to visit] my thrones.\line I have laboured. I have made myself perfect. O grant thou that I may\line be held in fear. Create thou awe of me. Let the gods of the Tuat be\line afraid of me, and let them fight for me in their halls. Permit not\line thou to come nigh unto me him that would attack me, or would injure me\line in the House of Darkness. Cover over the helpless one, hide him. Let\line do likewise the gods who hearken unto the word [of truth], the Khepriu\line gods who are in the following of Osiris. Hold ye your peace then, O ye\line gods, whilst the God holdeth speech with me, he who listeneth to the\line truth. I speak unto him my words. Osiris, grant thou that that which\line cometh forth from thy mouth may circulate to me. Let me see thine\line own Form. Let thy Souls envelop me. Grant thou that I may come\line forth, and that I may be master of my legs, and let me live there like\line Nebertcher upon his throne. Let the gods of the Tuat hold me in\line fear, and let them fight for me in their halls. Grant thou that I\line may move forward with him and with the Ariu gods, and let me be firmly\line stablished on my pedestal like the Lord of Life. Let me be in the\line company of Isis, the goddess, and let [the gods] keep me safe from him\line that would do an injury unto me. Let none come to see the helpless\line one. May I advance, and may I come to the Henti boundaries of the sky.\line Let me address words to Keb, and let me make supplicaion to the god Hu\line with Nebertcher. Let the gods of the Tuat be afraid of me, and let\line them fight for me in their halls. Let them see that thou hast provided\line me with food for the festival. I am one of those Spirit-souls who\line dwell in the Light-god. I have made my form in his Form, when he\line cometh to Tetu. I am a Spirit-body among his Spirit-bodies; he shall\line speak unto thee the things [which concern] me. Would that he would\line cause me to be held in fear! Would that he would create [in them]\line awe of me! Let the gods of the Tuat be afraid of me, and let them\line fight for me [in their halls]. I, even I, am a Spirit-soul, a\line dweller in the Light-god, whose form hath been created in divine\line flesh. I am one of those Spirit-souls who dwell in the Light-god,\line who were created by Tem himself, and who exist in the blossoms of\line his Eye. He hath made to exist, he hath made glorious, and he hath\line magnified their faces during their existence with him. Behold, he is\line Alone in Nu. They acclaim him when he cometh forth from the horizon,\line and the gods and the Spirit-souls who have come into being with him\line ascribe fear unto him.\line I am one of the worms which have been created by the Eye of the Lord\line One. And behold, when as yet Isis had not given birth to Horus, I\line was flourishing, and I had waxed old, and had become pre-eminent among\line the Spirit-souls who had come into being with him. I rose up like a\line divine hawk, and Horus endowed me with a Spirit-body with his soul, so\line that [I] might take possession of the property of Osiris in the\line Tuat. He shall say to the twin Lion-gods for me, the Chief of the\line House of the Nemes Crown, the Dweller in his cavern: Get thee back\line to the heights of heaven, for behold, inasmuch as thou art a\line Spirit-body with the creations of Horus, the Nemes Crown shall not\line be to thee: [but] thou shalt have speech even to the uttermost\line limits of the heavens. I, the warder, took possession of the\line property of Horus [which belonged] to Osiris in the Tuat, and Horus\line repeated to me what his father Osiris had said unto him in the years\line [past], on the days of his burial. Give thou to me the Nemes Crown,\line say the twin Lion-gods for me. Advance thou, come along the road of\line heaven, and look upon those who dwell in the uttermost limits of the\line horizon. The gods of the Tuat shall hold thee in fear, and they\line shall fight for thee in their halls. The god Auhet belongeth to\line them. All the gods who guard the shrine of the Lord One are smitten\line with terror at [my] words.\line Hail, saith the god who is exalted upon his coffer to me! He hath\line bound on the Nemes Crown, [by] the decree of the twin Lion-gods. The\line god Aahet hath made a way for me. I am exalted [on the coffer], the\line twin Lion-gods have bound the Nemes Crown on me and my two locks of\line hair are given unto me. He hath stablished for me my heart by his\line own flesh, and by his great, two-fold strength, and I shall not fall\line headlong before Shu. I am Hetep, the Lord of the two Uraei-goddesses\line who are to be adored. I know the Light-god, his winds are in my\line body. The Bull which striketh terror [into souls] shall not repulse\line me. I come daily into the House of the twin Lion-gods. I come forth\line therefrom into the House of Isis. I look upon the holy things which\line are hidden. I see the being who is therein. I speak to the great\line ones of Shu, they repulse him that is wrathful in his hour. I am Horus\line who dwelleth in his divine Light. I am master of his crown. I am\line master of his radiance. I advance towards the Henti boundaries of\line heaven. Horus is upon his seat. Horus is upon his thrones. My face\line is like that of a divine hawk. I am one who is equipped [like] his\line lord. I shall come forth to Tetu. I shall see Osiris. I shall live\line in his actual presence.... Nut. They shall see me. I shall see the\line gods [and] the Eye of Horus burning with fire before my eyes. They\line shall reach out their hands to me. I shall stand up. I shall be master\line of him that would subject me to restraint. They shall open the holy\line paths to me, they shall see my form, they shall listen to my words.\line [Homage] to you, O ye gods of the Tuat, whose faces are turned back,\line whose powers advance, conduct ye me to the Star-gods which never rest.\line Prepare ye for me the holy ways to the Hemat house, and to your god,\line the Soul, who is the mighty one of terror. Horus hath commanded me\line to lift up your faces; do ye look upon me. I have risen up like a\line divine hawk. Horus hath made me to be a Spirit-body by means of his\line Soul, and to take possession of the things of Osiris in the Tuat. Make\line ye for me a path. I have travelled and I have arrived at those who are\line chiefs of their caverns, and who are guardians of the House of Osiris.\line I speak unto them his mighty deeds. I made them to know concerning his\line victories. He is ready [to butt with his] two horns at Set. They\line know him who hath taken possession of the god Hu, and who hath taken\line possession of the Powers of Tem.\line Travel thou on thy way safely, cry out the gods of the Tuat to me. O\line ye who make your names pre-eminent, who are chiefs in your shrines,\line and who are guardians of the House of Osiris, grant, I pray you,\line that I may come to you. I have bound up and I have gathered together\line your Powers. I have directed the Powers of the ways, the wardens of\line the horizon, and of the Hemat House of heaven. I have stablished their\line fortresses for Osiris. I have prepared the ways for him. I have\line performed the things which [he] hath commanded. I come forth to\line Tetu. I see Osiris. I speak to him concerning the matter of his\line Great Son, whom he loveth, and concerning [the smiting of] the heart\line of Set. I look upon the lord who was helpless. How shall I make them\line to know the plans of the gods, and that which Horus did without the\line knowledge of his father Osiris?\line Hail, Lord, thou Soul, most awful and terrible, behold me. I have\line come, I make thee to be exalted! I have forced a way though the\line Tuat. I have opened the roads which appertain to heaven, and those\line which appertain to the earth, and no one hath opposed me therein. I\line have exalted thy face, O Lord of Eternity.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (In the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 14, the Chapter ends with the\line following.)\line\line Exalted art thou on thy throne, O Osiris! Thou hast heard fair\line things, O Osiris! Thy strength is vigorous, O Osiris! Thy head is\line fastened on thy body, O Osiris! Thy neck is made firm, O Osiris! Thy\line heart is glad, [O Osiris!]. Thy speech is made effective, O Osiris!\line Thy princes rejoice Thou art established the Bull in Amentet. Thy\line son Horus hath ascended thy trrone, and all life is with him. Millions\line of years minister unto him, and millions of years hold him in fear.\line The Company of the Gods are his servants, and they fold him in fear.\line The god Tem, the Governor, the only One among the gods, hath spoken,\line and his word passeth not away. Horus is both the divine food and the\line sacrifice. He made haste to gather together [the members of] of his\line father. Horus is his deliverer. Horus is his deliverer. Horus hath\line sprung from the essence of his divine father and from his decay. He\line hath become the Governor of Egypt. The gods shall work for him, and\line they shall toil for him for million of years. He shall make millions\line of years to live through his Eye, the only one of its lord,\line Nebertcher.]\line\line (From the Turin Papyrus, Bl. XXX)\line\line Exalted is thy throne, O Osiris. Thou hearest well, O Osiris. Thy\line strength flourisheth, O Osiris. I have fastened thy head [on thy] body\line for thee. I have stablished thy throat, the throne of the joy of thy\line heart. Thy words are stable. Thy shenit princes are glad. Thou art\line stablished as the Bull of Amentet. Thy son Horus hath ascended thy\line throne. All life is with him. Millions of years work for him. The\line Company of the Gods fear him. Tem, the One Power of the Gods, hath\line spoken, and what he hath said is not changed, Hetu Aabi. Horus hath\line stood up. I have gone about collecting his father. Horus hath\line delivered his father. Horus hath delivered [his mother]. My mother\line is Horus. My brother is Horus. My uncle is Horus. I have come. Horus\line followeth his father.... there the dirt of his head. The gods shall\line serve him. Millions of years...... in his Eye, the Only One of its\line Lord, Neb-er-tcher.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF BEING TRANSFORMED INTO THE PRINCE OF THE TCHATCHAU\line CHIEFS. The Osiris Nu, whose word is truth, saith:- I am the god\line Tem, the maker of the sky, the creator of the things which are, who\line cometh forth from the earth, who made the seed of man to come into\line being, the Lord of things, who fashioned the gods, the Great God,\line who created himself, the Lord of Life, who made to flourish the Two\line Companies of the Gods. Homage to you, O ye divine Lords of things,\line ye holy beings, whose seats are veiled! Homage to you, O ye Lords of\line Eternity, whose forms are concealed, whose sanctuaries are\line mysteries, whose places of abode are not known! Homage to you, O ye\line gods, who dwell in the Tenait (Circle of Light)! Homage to you, O ye\line gods of the Circle of the country of the Cataracts! Homage to you, O\line ye gods who dwell in Amentet! Homage to you, O ye gods who dwell\line within Nut! Grant ye to me that I may come before you, I am pure, I am\line like a god. I am endowed with a Spirit-soul. I am strong. I am endowed\line with a Heart-soul. I bring unto you incense, and spice, and natron.\line I have done away with the chidings of your mouths. I have come, I have\line done away the evil which was in your hearts, and I have removed the\line offences which appertained to you [against me]. I bring to you deeds\line of well-doing, and I present before you truth. I know you. I know your\line names. I know your forms which are not known. I come into being\line among you. My coming is like unto that god who eateth men, and who\line feedeth upon the gods. I am strong before you even like that god who\line is exalted upon his pedestal, unto whom the gods come with\line rejoicing, and the goddesses make supplication when they see me. I\line have come unto you. I have ascended my throne like your Two Daughters.\line I have taken my seat in the horizon. I receive my offerings of\line propitiation upon my altars. I drink my fill of seth wine every\line evening. I come to those who are making rejoicings, and the gods who\line live in the horizon ascribe unto me praises, as the divine\line Spirit-body, the Lord of mortals. I am exalted like that holy god\line who dwelleth in the Great House. The gods rejoice greatly when they\line see my beautiful appearances from the body of the goddess Nut, and\line when the goddess Nut bringeth me forth.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO THE SERPENT SATA.\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I am the serpent Sata\line whose years are infinite. I lie down dead. I am born daily. I am the\line serpent Sa-en-ta, the dweller in the uttermost parts of the earth. I\line lie down in death. I am born, I become new, I renew my youth every\line day.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO THE CROCODILE-GOD.\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I am the Crocodile-god\line (Sebak) who dwelleth amid his terrors. I am the Crocodile-god and I\line seize [my prey] like a ravening beast. I am the great Fish which is in\line Kamui. I am the Lord to whom bowings and prostrations are made in\line Sekhem. And the Osiris Ani is the lord to whom bowings and\line prostrations are made in Sekhem.\line\line\line (From the Papyrus of Nebseni)\line\line Behold, I am the dweller in his terrors, I am the crocodile, his\line firstborn. I bring (prey) from a distance. I am the Fish of Horus, the\line Great One in Kamui. I am the lord of bowings in Sekhem.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO PTAH. The Osiris Ani\line [whose word is truth, saith]:- I eat bread. I drink ale. I gird up\line my garments. I fly like a hawk. I cackle like the Smen goose. I alight\line upon that place hard by the Sepulchre on the festival of the Great\line God. That which is abominable, that which is abominable I will not\line eat. [An abominable thing] is filth, I will not eat thereof. That\line which is an abomination unto my KA shall not enter my body. I will\line live upon that whereon live the gods and the Spirit-souls. I shall\line live, and I shall be master of their cakes. I am master of them, and I\line shall eat them under the trees of the dweller in the House of\line Hathor, my Lady. I will make an offering. My cakes are in Tetu, my\line offerings are in Anu. I gird about myself the robe which is woven\line for me by the goddess Tait. I shall stand up and sit down in\line whatsoever place it pleaseth me to do so. My head is like unto that of\line Ra. I am gathered together like Tem.\line Here offer the four cakes of Ra, and the offerings of the earth.\line I shall come forth. My tongue is like that of Ptah, and my throat is\line like unto that of Hathor, and I remember the words of Tem, of my\line father, with my mouth. He forced the woman, the wife of Keb,\line breaking the heads near him; therefore was the fear of him there.\line [His] praises are repeated with vigour. I am decreed to be the Heir,\line the lord of the earth of Keb. I have union with women. Keb hath\line refreshed me, and he hath caused me to ascend his throne. Those who\line dwell in Anu bow their heads to me. I am [their] Bull, I am stronger\line than [the Lord] of the hour. I unite with women. I am master for\line millions of years.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO THE SOUL OF TEM. The\line Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I shall not enter into the\line place of destruction, I shall not perish, I shall not know [decay].\line I am Ra, who came forth from Nu, the Soul of the God who created his\line own members. What I abominate is sin; I will not look thereon. I cry\line not out against truth, nay, I live therein. I am the god Hu, the\line imperishable god, in my name of "Soul." I have created myself with Nu,\line in the name of "Khepera." I exist in them like Ra. I am the Lord of\line Light.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu)\line\line That which is an abomination unto me is death; let me not go into\line the chamber of torture which is in the Tuat. I am the delight of the\line Khu of Osiris. I make to be content the heart[s] of those who dwell\line among the divine things which are beloved [by me]. They cause the fear\line of me [to abound], they create the awe of me to be in those divine\line beings who dwell in their own circles. Behold, I am exalted on my\line own standard, and upon my throne, and upon my seat which is assigned\line [to me]. I am the god Nu, and those who commit sin shall not destroy\line me. I am the firstborn of the primeval god, and my soul is the Souls\line of the Eternal Gods, and my body is Everlastingness. My created form\line is [that of] the god Eternity, the Lord of Years, and the Prince of\line Everlastingness. I am the Creator of the Darkness, who maketh his seat\line in the uttermost limits of the heavens, [which] I love. I arrive at\line their boundaries. I advance upon my two legs. I direct my resting\line place. I sail over the sky. I fetter and destroy the hidden serpents\line which are about my footsteps [in going to] the Lord of the Two Arms.\line My soul is the Souls of the Eternal Gods, and my body is\line Everlastingness. I am the exalted one, the Lord of the Land of Tebu. I\line am the Child in the city: "Young man in the country" is my name.\line "Imperishable one" is my name. I am the Soul Creator of Nu. I make\line my habitation in Khert-Neter. My nest is invisible, my egg is not\line broken. I have done away the evil which is in me. I shall see my\line Father, the Lord of the Evening. His body dwelleth in Anu. I am made\line to be the Light-god, a dweller in the Light-god, over the Western\line Domain of the Hebt bird.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO THE BENU BIRD. The\line Osiris, the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I flew up out\line of primeval matter. I came into being like the god Khepera. I\line germinated like the plants. I am concealed like the tortoise [in his\line shell]. I am the seed of every god. I am Yesterday of the Four\line [Quarters of the Earth, and] the Seven Uraei, who came into being in\line the Eastern land. [I am] the Great One (Horus) who illumineth the\line Hememet spirits with the light of his body. [I am] that god in respect\line of Set. [I am] Thoth who [stood] between them (Horus and Set) as the\line judge on behalf of the Governor of Sekhem and the Souls of Anu. [He\line was like] a stream between them. I have come. I rise up on my\line throne. I am endowed with Khu. I am mighty. I am endowed with\line godhood among the gods. I am Khensu, [the lord] of every kind of\line strength.\line\line RUBRIC: [If] this Chapter [be known by the deceased], he shall\line come forth pure by day after his death, and he shall perform every\line transformation which hs soul desireth to make. He shall be among the\line Followers of Un-Nefer, and he shall satisfy himself with the food of\line Osiris, and with sepulchral meals. He shall see the Disk [of the Sun],\line he shall be in good case upon earth before Ra, and his word shall be\line truth in the sight of Osiris, and no evil thing whatsoever shall\line have dominion over him for ever and ever.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO A HERON. The\line Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I am the master of\line beasts brought for sacrifice, [and] of the knives which are [held]\line at their heads [and] their beards; those who dwell in their emerald\line [fields], the Aged Gods, and the Spirit-souls, are ready at the moment\line for the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace. He maketh slaughter\line on the earth, and I make slaughter on the earth. I am strong. I follow\line the heights unto heaven. I have made myself pure. I walk with long\line strides to my city. I have become an owner of land there. I advance to\line Sepu...... is given to me in Unu. I have set the gods upon their\line roads. I have made splendid the houses and towns of those who are in\line their shrines. I know the stream of Nut. I know Tatun. I know Teshert.\line I have brought along their horns. I know Heka. I have hearkened to\line this words. I am the Red Bull-calf which is marked with markings.\line The gods shall say when they hear [of me]: Uncover your faces. His\line coming is to me. There is light which ye know not. Times and seasons\line are in my body. I do not speak [lies] in the place of truth, daily.\line The truth is hidden on the eyebrows. [By] night [I] sail up the\line river to keep the feast of him that is dead, to embrace the Aged\line God, and to guard the earth, I the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Saite Recension)\line\line RUBRIC: If this Chapter be known [by the deceased], he will live\line like a perfect Spirit-soul in Khert-Neter; no evil thing whatsoever\line shall overthrow him.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO THE LOTUS. The\line Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I am the holy lotus that\line cometh forth from the light which belongeth to the nostrils of Ra, and\line which belongeth to the head of Hathor. I have made my way, and I\line seek after him, that is to say, Horus. I am the pure lotus that cometh\line forth from the field [of Ra].\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (Naville, op. cit., I, Bl. XCIII)\line\line Chapter of making the transformation into a lotus. The Osiris, the\line lady of of the house, Aui, whose word is truth, in peace, saith:-\line Hail, thou Lotus, thou type of the god Nefer-Temu! I am the man who\line knoweth your names. I know your names among the gods, the lords of\line Khert-Neter. I am one among you. Grant ye that I may see the gods\line who are the Guides of the Tuat. Grant ye to me a seat in\line Khert-Neter, near the Lords of Amentet. Assign to me a habitation in\line the land of Tchesert. Receive ye me in the presence of the Lords of\line Eternity. Let my soul come forth in whatsoever place it pleaseth.\line Let it not be rejected in the presence of the Great Company of the\line Gods.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] MAKING THE TRANSFORMATION INTO THE GOD WHO\line LIGHTENETH THE DARKNESS. The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is\line truth, saith:- I am the girdle of the garment of the god Nu, which\line giveth light, and shineth, and belongeth to his breast, the\line illuminer of the darkness, the uniter of the two Rehti deities, the\line dweller in my body, through the great spell of the words of my\line mouth. I rise up, but he who was coming after me hath fallen. He who\line was with him in the Valley of Abtu hath fallen. I rest. I remember\line him. The god Hu hath taken possession of me in my town. I found him\line there. I have carried away the darkness by my strength, I have\line filled the Eye [of Ra] when it was helpless, and when it came not on\line the festival of the fifteenth day. I have weighed Sut in the celestial\line houses against the Aged One who was with him. I have equipped Thoth in\line the House of the Moon-god, when the fifteenth day of the festival come\line not. I have taken possession of the Urrt Crown. Truth is in my body;\line turquoise and crystal are its months. My homestead is there among\line the lapis-lazuli, among the furrows thereof. I am Hem-Nu, the\line lightener of the darkness. I have come to lighten the darkness; it\line is light. I have lightened the darkness. I have overthrown the\line ashmiu-fiends. I have sung hymns to those who dwell in the darkness. I\line have made to stand up the weeping ones, whose faces were covered over;\line they were in a helpless state of misery. Look ye then upon me. I am\line Hem-Nu. I will not let you hear concerning it. [I have fought. I am\line Hem-Nu. I have lightened the darkness. I have come. I have made an end\line to the darkness which hath become light indeed.]\line\line THE CHAPTER OF NOT DYING A SECOND TIME. The Osiris Ani, whose word\line is truth, saith:- Hail, Thoth! What is it that hath happened to the\line children of Nut? They have waged war, they have upheld strife, they\line have done evil, they have created the fiends, they have made\line slaughter, they have caused trouble; in truth, in all their doings the\line strong have worked against the weak. Grant, O might of Thoth, that\line that which the god Tem hath decreed [may be done!] And thou\line regardest not evil, nor art thou provoked to anger when they bring\line their years to confusion, and throng in and push in to disturb their\line months. For in all that they have done unto thee they have worked\line iniquity in secret. I am they writing-palette, O Thoth, and I have\line brought unto thee thine ink-jar. I am not of those who work iniquity\line in their secret places; let not evil happen unto me.\line The Osiris, the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- Hail, Temu!\line What manner of land is this unto which I have come? It hath not water,\line it hath not air; it is depth unfathomable, it is black as the blackest\line night, and men wander helplessly therein. In it a man cannot live in\line quietness of heart; nor may the longings of love be satisfied therein.\line But let the state of the Spirit-souls be given unto me instead of\line water and air, and the satisfying of the longings of love, and let\line quietness of heart be given unto me instead of cakes and ale. The\line god Tem hath decreed that I shall see thy face, and that I shall not\line suffer from the things which pain thee. May every god transmit unto\line thee his throne for millions of years. Thy throne hath descended\line unto thy son Horus, and the god Tem hath decreed that thy course shall\line be among the holy princes. In truth he shall rule from thy throne, and\line he shall be heir to the throne of the Dweller in the fiery Lake\line [Neserser]. In truth it hath been decreed that in me he shall see\line his likeness, and that my face shall look upon the face of the Lord\line Tem. How long then have I to live? It is decreed that thou shalt\line live for millions of years, a life of millions of years. Let it be\line granted to me to pass on to the holy princes, for indeed, I have\line done away all the evil which I committed, from the time when this\line earth came into being from Nu, when it sprang from the watery abyss\line even as it was in the days of old. I am Fate and Osiris, I have made\line my transformations into the likeness of divers serpents. Man knoweth\line not, and the gods cannot behold the two-fold beauty which I have\line made for Osiris, the greatest of the gods. I have given unto him the\line region of the dead. And, verily, his son Horus is seated upon the\line throne of the Dweller in the fiery Lake [of Neserser], as his heir.\line I have made him to have his throne in the Boat of Millions of Years.\line Horus is stablished upon his throne [among his] kinsmen, and he hath\line all that is with him. Verily, the Soul of Set, which is greater than\line all the gods, hath departed. Let it be granted to me to bind his\line soul in fetter in the Boat of the God, when I please, and let him hold\line the Body of the God in fear. O my father Osiris, thou hast done for me\line that which thy father Ra did for thee. Let me abide upon the earth\line permanently. Let me keep possession of my throne. Let my heir be\line strong. Let my tomb, and my friends who are upon the earth,\line flourish. Let my enemies be given over to destruction, and to the\line shackles of the goddess Serq. I am thy son. Ra is my father. On me\line likewise thou hast conferred life, strength, and health. Horus is\line established upon his tomb. Grant thou that the days of my life may\line come unto worship and honour.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Leyden Papyrus of Ra)\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter shall be recited over a figure of Horus, made\line of lapis-lazuli, which shall be placed on the neck of the deceased. It\line is a protection upon earth, and it will secure for the deceased the\line affection of men, gods, and the Spirit-souls which are perfect.\line Moreover it acteth as a spell in Khert-Neter, but it must be recited\line by thee on behalf of the Osiris Ra, regularly and continually millions\line of times.\line\line [THE CHAPTER OF] ENTERING INTO THE HALL OF MAATI TO PRAISE OSIRIS\line KHENTI-AMENTI. The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose word is truth, saith:-\line I have come unto thee. I have drawn nigh to behold thy beauties (thy\line beneficient goodness). My hands are [extended] in adoration of thy\line name of "Maat." I have come. I have drawn nigh unto [the place\line where] the cedar-tree existeth not, where the acacia tree doth not put\line forth shoots, and where the ground produceth neither grass nor\line herbs. Now I have entered into the habitation which is hidden, and I\line hold converse with Set. My protector advanced to me, covered was his\line face.... on the hidden things. He entered into the house of Osiris, he\line saw the hidden things which were therein. The Tchatchau Chiefs of\line the Pylons were in the form of Spirits. The god Anpu spake unto\line those about him with the words of a man who cometh from Ta-mera,\line saying, "He knoweth our roads and our towns. I am reconciled unto him.\line When I smell his odour it is even as the odour of one of you." And I\line say unto him: I the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace, whose\line word is truth, have come. I have drawn nigh to behold the Great\line Gods. I would live upon the propitiatory offerings [made] to their\line Doubles. I would live on the borders [of the territory of] the Soul,\line the Lord of Tetu. He shall make me to come forth in the form of a Benu\line bird, and to hold converse [with him.] I have been in the stream [to\line purify myself]. I have made offerings of incense. I betook myself to\line the Acacia Tree of the [divine] Children. I lived in Abu in the\line House of the goddess Satet. I made to sink in the water the boat of\line the enemies. I sailed over the lake [in the temple] in the Neshmet\line Boat. I have looked upon the Sahu of Kamur. I have been in Tetu. I\line have held my peace. I have made the god to be master of his legs. I\line have been in the House of Teptuf. I have seen him, that is the\line Governor of the Hall of the God. I have entered into the House of\line Osiris and I have removed the head-coverings of him that is therein. I\line have entered into Rasta, and I have seen the Hidden One who is\line therein. I was hidden, but I found the boundary. I journeyed to\line Nerutef, and he who was therein covered me with a garment. I have\line myrrh of women, together with the shenu powder of living folk.\line Verily he (Osiris) told me the things which concerned himself. I said:\line Let thy weighing of me be even as we desire.\line And the Majesty of Anpu shall say unto me, "Knowest thou the name of\line this door, and canst thou tell it?" And the Osiris the scribe Ani,\line whose word is truth, in peace, whose word is truth, shall say,\line "Khersek-Shu" is the name of this door. And the Majesty of the god\line Anpu shall say unto me, "Knowest thou the name of the upper leaf,\line and the name of the lower leaf?" [And the Osiris the scribe Ani] shall\line say: "Neb-Maat-heri-retiu-f" is the name of the upper leaf and\line "Neb-pehti-thesu-menment" [is the name of the lower leaf. And the\line Majesty of the god Anpu shall say], "Pass on, for thou hast knowledge,\line O Osiris the scribe, the assessor of the holy offerings of all the\line gods of Thebes Ani, whose word is truth, the lord of loyal service [to\line Osiris]."\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Brit. Mus. No. 10477, Sheet 22)\line\line [THE FOLLOWING] WORDS SHALL BE SAID BY THE STEWARD OF THE KEEPER\line OF THE SEAL, NU, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH, WHEN HE COMETH FORTH TO THE HALL\line OF MAATI, SO THAT HE MAY BE SEPARATED FROM EVERY SIN WHICH HE HATH\line COMMITTED, AND MAY BEHOLD THE FACES OF THE GODS. The Osiris Nu,\line whose word is truth, saith: Homage to thee, O great God, Lord of\line Maati! I have come unto thee, O my Lord, and I have brought myself\line hither that I may behold thy beauties. I know thee, I know thy name, I\line know the names of the Forty-two Gods who live with thee in this Hall\line of Maati, who live by keeping ward over sinners, and who feed upon\line their blood on the day when the consciences of men are reckoned up\line in the presence of the god Un-Nefer. In truth thy name is\line "Rehti-Merti-Nebti-Maati." In truth I have come unto thee, I have\line brought Maati (Truth) to thee. I have done away sin for thee. I have\line not committed sins against men. I have not opposed my family and\line kinsfolk. I have not acted fraudulently in the Seat of Truth. I have\line not known men who were of no account. I have not wrought evil. I\line have not made it to be the first [consideration daily that\line unnecessary] work should be done for me. I have not brought forward my\line name for dignities. I have not [attempted] to direct servants [I\line have not belittled God]. I have not defrauded the humble man of his\line property. I have not done what the gods abominate. I have not vilified\line a slave to his master. I have not inflicted pain. I have not caused\line anyone to go hungry. I have not made any man to weep. I have not\line committed murder. I have not given the order for murder to be\line committed. I have not caused calamities to befall men and women. I\line have not plundered the offerings in the temples. I have not\line defrauded the gods of their cake-offerings. I have not carried off the\line fenkhu cakes [offered to] the Spirits. I have not committed\line fornication. I have not masturbated [in the sanctuaries of the god\line of my city]. I have not diminished from the bushel. I have not filched\line [land from my neighbour's estate and] added it to my own acre. I\line have not encroached upon the fields [of others]. I have not added to\line the weights of the scales. I have not depressed the pointer of the\line balance. I have not carried away the milk from the mouths of children.\line I have not driven the cattle away from their pastures. I have not\line snared the geese in the goose-pens of the gods. I have not caught fish\line with bait made of the bodies of the same kind of fish. I have not\line stopped water when it should flow. I have not made a cutting in a\line canal of running water. I have not extinguished a fire when it\line should burn. I have not violated the times [of offering] the chosen\line meat offerings. I have not driven away the cattle on the estates of\line the gods. I have not turned back the god at his appearances. I am\line pure. I am pure. I am pure. My pure offerings are the pure offerings\line of that great Benu which dwelleth in Hensu. For behold, I am the\line nose of Neb-nefu (the lord of the air), who giveth sustenance unto all\line mankind, on the day of the filling of the Utchat in Anu, in the second\line month of the season Pert, on the last of the month, [in the presence\line of the Lord of this earth]. I have seen the filling of the Utchat in\line Anu, therefore let not calamity befall me in this land, or in this\line Hall of Maati, because I know the names of the gods who are therein,\line [and who are the followers of the Great God].\line THE NEGATIVE CONFESSION\line\line Hail, Usekh-nemmt, who comest forth from Anu, I have not committed\line sin.\line Hail, Hept-khet, who comest forth from Kher-aha, I have not\line committed robbery with violence.\line Hail, Fenti, who comest forth from Khemenu, I have not stolen.\line Hail, Am-khaibit, who comest forth from Qernet, I have not slain men\line and women.\line Hail, Neha-her, who comest forth from Rasta, I have not stolen\line grain.\line Hail, Ruruti, who comest forth from heaven, I have not purloined\line offerings.\line Hail, Arfi-em-khet, who comest forth from Suat, I have not stolen\line the property of God.\line Hail, Neba, who comest and goest, I have not uttered lies.\line Hail, Set-qesu, who comest forth from Hensu, I have not carried away\line food.\line Hail, Utu-nesert, who comest forth from Het-ka-Ptah, I have not\line uttered curses.\line Hail, Qerrti, who comest forth from Amentet, I have not committed\line adultery, I have not lain with men.\line Hail, Her-f-ha-f, who comest forth from thy cavern, I have made none\line to weep.\line Hail, Basti, who comest forth from Bast, I have not eaten the heart.\line Hail, Ta-retiu, who comest forth from the night, I have not attacked\line any man.\line Hail, Unem-snef, who comest forth from the execution chamber, I am\line not a man of deceit.\line Hail, Unem-besek, who comest forth from Mabit, I have not stolen\line cultivated land.\line Hail, Neb-Maat, who comest forth from Maati, I have not been an\line eavesdropper.\line Hail, Tenemiu, who comest forth from Bast, I have not slandered\line [no man].\line Hail, Sertiu, who comest forth from Anu, I have not been angry\line without just cause.\line Hail, Tutu, who comest forth from Ati (the Busirite Nome), I have\line not debauched the wife of any man.\line Hail, Uamenti, who comest forth from the Khebt chamber, I have not\line debauched the wife of [any] man.\line Hail, Maa-antuf, who comest forth from Per-Menu, I have not polluted\line myself.\line Hail, Her-uru, who comest forth from Nehatu, I have terrorized none.\line Hail, Khemiu, who comest forth from Kaui, I have not transgressed\line [the law].\line Hail, Shet-kheru, who comest forth from Urit, I have not been wroth.\line Hail, Nekhenu, who comest forth from Heqat, I have not shut my\line ears to the words of truth.\line Hail, Kenemti, who comest forth from Kenmet, I have not blasphemed.\line Hail, An-hetep-f, who comest forth from Sau, I am not a man of\line violence.\line Hail, Sera-kheru, who comest forth from Unaset, I have not been a\line stirrer up of strife.\line Hail, Neb-heru, who comest forth from Netchfet, I have not acted\line with undue haste.\line Hail, Sekhriu, who comest forth from Uten, I have not pried into\line matters.\line Hail, Neb-abui, who comest forth from Sauti, I have not multiplied\line my words in speaking.\line Hail, Nefer-Tem, who comest forth from Het-ka-Ptah, I have wronged\line none, I have done no evil.\line Hail, Tem-Sepu, who comest forth from Tetu, I have not worked\line witchcraft against the king.\line Hail, Ari-em-ab-f, who comest forth from Tebu, I have never\line stopped [the flow of] water.\line Hail, Ahi, who comest forth from Nu, I have never raised my voice.\line Hail, Uatch-rekhit, who comest forth from Sau, I have not cursed\line God.\line Hail, Neheb-ka, who comest forth from thy cavern, I have not acted\line with arrogance.\line Hail, Neheb-nefert, who comest forth from thy cavern, I have not\line stolen the bread of the gods.\line Hail, Tcheser-tep, who comest forth from the shrine, I have not\line carried away the khenfu cakes from the Spirits of the dead.\line Hail, An-af, who comest forth from Maati, I have not snatched away\line the bread of the child, nor treated with contempt the god of my city.\line Hail, Hetch-abhu, who comest forth from Ta-she (the Fayyum), I\line have not slain the cattle belonging to the god.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nebseni)\line\line Hail, Usekh-nemmt, who comest forth from Anu, I have not committed\line sin.\line Hail, Hept-Shet, who comest forth from Kher-aha, I have not robbed\line with violence.\line Hail, Fenti, who comest forth from Khemenu, I have done no violence.\line Hail, Am-khaibitu, who comest forth from Qerrt, I have not stolen.\line Hail, Neha-hau, who comest forth from Rasta, I have not slain men.\line Hail, Ruruti, who comest forth from heaven, I have not made light\line the bushel.\line Hail, Arti-f-em-tes, who comest forth from Sekhem, I have not\line acted deceitfully.\line Hail, Neba, who comest and goest, I have not stolen the property\line of the god.\line Hail, Set-qesu, who comest forth from Hensu, I have not told lies.\line Hail, Uatch-nesert, who comest forth from Het-ka-Ptah, I have not\line carried away food.\line Hail, Qerti, who comest forth from Amenti, I have not uttered evil\line words.\line Hail, Hetch-abhu, who comest from Ta-she, I have attacked no man.\line Hail, Unem-snef, who comest forth from the execution chamber, I have\line not salin a bull which was the property of the god.\line Hail, Unem-besku, who comest [forth from the Mabet chamber], I\line have not acted deceitfully.\line Hail, Neb-maat, who comest forth from Maati, I have not pillaged the\line lands which have been ploughed.\line Hail, Thenemi, who comest forth from Bast, I have never pried into\line matters [to make mischief].\line Hail, Aati, who comest forth from Anu, I have not set my mouth in\line motion.\line Hail, Tutuf, who comest from from A, I have not been wroth except\line with reason.\line Hail, Uamemti, who comest forth from the execution chamber, I have\line not debauched the wife of a man.\line Hail, Maa-anuf, who comest forth from Per-Menu, I ahve not\line polluted myself.\line Hail, Heri-uru, who comest forth from [Nehatu], I have terrorized no\line man.\line Hail, Khemi, who comest forth from Ahaui, I have not made attacks.\line Hail, Shet-kheru, who comest forth from Uri, I have not been a man\line of anger.\line Hail, Nekhem, who comest forth from Heq-at, I have not turned a deaf\line ear to the words of truth.\line Hail, Ser-Kheru, who comest forth from Unes, I have not stirred up\line strife.\line Hail, Basti, who comest forth from Shetait, I have made none to\line weep.\line Hail, Her-f-ha-f, who comest forth from thy cavern, I have not\line committed acts of sexual impurity, or lain with men.\line Hail, Ta-ret, who comest forth from Akhkhu, I have not eaten my\line heart.\line Hail, Kenmti, who comest forth from Kenmet, I have cursed no man.\line Hail, An-hetep-f, who comest forth from Sau, I have not acted in a\line violent or oppressive manner.\line Hail, Neb-heru, who comest forth from Tchefet, I have not acted\line [or judged] hastily.\line Hail, Serekhi, who comest forth from Unth, I have not.... my hair, I\line have not harmed the god.\line Hail, Neb-abui, who comest forth from Sauti, I have not multiplied\line my speech overmuch.\line Hail, Nefer-Tem, who comest forth from Het-ka-Ptah, I have not acted\line with deciet, I have not worked wickedness.\line Hail, Tem-Sep, who comest forth from Tetu, I have not done things to\line effect the cursing of [the king].\line Hail, Ari-em-ab-f, who comest forth from Tebti, I have not stopped\line the flow of water.\line Hail, Ahi-mu, who comest forth from Nu, I have not raised my voice.\line Hail, Utu-rekhit, who comest forth from thy house, I have not\line curse God.\line Hail, Neheb-Nefert, who comest forth from the Lake of Nefer, I\line have not acted with insufferable insolence.\line Hail, Neheb-kau, who comest forth from [thy] city, I have not sought\line to make myself unduly distinguished.\line Hail, Tcheser-tep, who comest forth from thy cavern, I have not\line increased my wealth except through such things are [justly] my own\line possessions.\line Hail, An-a-f, who comest forth from Auker, I have not scorned [or\line treated with contempt] the god of my town.\line\line\line ADDRESS TO THE GODS OF THE TUAT\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Brit. Mus. No. 10477, Sheet 24)\line\line THE FOLLOWING ARE THE WORDS WHICH THE HEART OF TRUTH THAT IS SINLESS\line SHALL SAY WHEN HE COMETH WITH THE WORD OF TRUTH INTO THE HALL OF\line MAATI; THEY SHALL BE SAID WHEN HE COMETH TO THE GODS WHO DWELL IN\line THE TUAT; AND THEY ARE THE WORDS WHICH ARE [TO BE SAID] AFTER [HE\line COMETH FORTH FROM] THE HALL OF MAATI.\line\line Nu, the steward of the keeper of the seal, whose word is truth,\line saith:- Homage to you, O ye gods who dwell in your Hall of Maati! I\line know you, I know your names. Let me not fall under your knives of\line slaughter, and bring ye not forward my wickedness to this god in whose\line following ye are. Let not evil hap come upon me through you. Speak\line ye the truth concerning me in the presence of Neb-er-tcher, for I have\line done what is right and just in Ta-Mera. I have not cursed the god, and\line my evil hap did not come upon him that was king in his day.\line Homage to you, O ye who dwell in your Hall of Maati, who have\line nothing false in your bodies, who live upon Truth, who feed yourselves\line upon Truth in the presence of Horus who dwelleth in his Disk,\line deliver ye me from Beba, who feedeth upon the livers of the great ones\line on the day of the Great Judgment. Grant ye that I may come before you,\line for I have not committed sin, I have done no act of deceit, I have\line done no evil thing, and I have not borne [false] witness; therefore\line let nothing [evil] be done to me. I have lived upon truth, I have\line fed upon truth, I have performed the ordinances of men, and the things\line which gratify the gods. I have propitiated the god by doing his\line will, I have given bread to the hungry man, and water to him that\line was athirst, and apparel to the naked man, and a ferry-boat to him\line that had no boat. I have made propitiatory offerings and given cakes\line to the gods, and the "things which appear at the word" to the Spirits.\line Deliver then ye me, protect then ye me, and make ye no report\line against me in the presence [of the Great God]. I am pure in respect of\line my mouth, and I am clean in respect of my hands, therefore let it be\line said unto me by those who shall behold me: "Come in peace, Come in\line peace." For I have heard that great word which the Sahu spake to the\line CAT, in the House of Hapt-ra. I have borne witness to Her-f-ha-f,\line and he hath given a decision [concerning me]. I have seen the things\line over which the Persea tree which is in Rasta, spreadeth its\line branches. I have made petitions to the gods, [and I] know the things\line [which appertain to] their bodies. I have come, travelling a long\line road, to bear righteous testimony, and to set the Balance upon its\line supports within Aukert.\line Hail, thou who art exalted high upon thy standard, thou Lord of\line the Atef Crown, who dost make thy name to be "Lord of the Winds,"\line deliver thou me from thy divine Envoys who punish and afflict\line according to [thy] decrees, and who make calamities to arise, and\line whose faces are without coverings, for I have done what is right and\line true for the Lord of Truth. I am pure. My breast is purified by\line libations, and my hinder parts are made clean with the things which\line make clean, and my inner parts have been dipped in the Lake of\line Truth. There is no single member of mine which lacketh truth. I have\line washed myself clean in the Lake of the South. I have rested myself\line in the City of the North, which is in Sekhet Sanhemu (the Field of the\line Grasshoppers), where the mariners of Ra wash themselves clean at the\line second hour of the night, and at the third hour of the day. The hearts\line of the gods are gratified when they have passed over it, whether it be\line by night or whether it be by day, and they say unto me, "Let thyself\line advance." They say unto me, "Who art thou?" And they say unto me,\line "What is thy name?" [And I reply], "Sept-kheri-nehait-ammi-beq-f" is\line my name. Then they say unto me, "Advance straightway on the city which\line is to the North of the Olive Tree. What dost thou see there?" The\line Leg and the Thigh. What dost thou say unto them? Let me see rejoicings\line in these lands of the Fenkhu. What do they give unto thee? A flame\line of fire and a sceptre-amulet [made] of crystal. What dost thou do with\line them? I bury them on the furrow of M'naat, as things for the night.\line What dost thou find on the furrow of Maat? A sceptre of flint, the\line name of which is "Giver of winds." What now didst thou do with the\line flame of fire and the sceptre-amulet [made] of crystal, after thou\line didst bury them? I said a spell over them, and I dug them up. I\line quenched the flame of fire and I broke the sceptre-amulet, and I\line made a lake of water. [Then shall the Two and forty gods say unto me]:\line "Come now, pass in over the threshold of this door of the Hall of\line Maati, for thou hast knowledge of us." "We will not allow thee to\line enter in over us," say the bars of this door, "unless thou tellest\line us our names." [And I reply], "Tekh-bu-maa" is your name. The right\line lintel of this door saith: "I will not allow thee to pass over me\line unless thou tellest me my name." [And I reply], "Henku-en-fat-maat" is\line thy name. The left lintel of this door saith: "I will not allow\line thee to pass over me unless thou tellest me my name." [And I reply],\line "Henku-en-arp" is thy name. The ground of this door saith: "I will not\line allow thee to pass over me unless thou tellest me my name." [And I\line reply], "Aua-en-Keb" is thy name. And the bolt of this door saith:\line "I will not open the door to thee unless thou tellest me my name."\line [And I reply], "Saah-en-mut-f" is thy name. The socket of the\line fastening of this door saith: "I will not open unto thee unless thou\line tellest my name." [And I reply], "The Living Eye of Sebek, the Lord of\line Bakhau," is thy name. The Doorkeeper of this door saith: "I will not\line open to thee, and I will not let thee enter by me unless thou\line tellest my name." [And I reply], "Elbow of the god Shu who placeth\line himself to protect Osiris" is thy name. The posts of this door say:\line "We will not let thee pass in by us unless thou tellest our name."\line [And I reply], "Children of the uraei-goddesses" is your name. The\line Doorkeeper of this door saith: "I will not open to thee, and I will\line not let thee enter in by me unless thou tellest my name. [And I\line reply], "Ox of Keb" is thy name. [And they reply], "Thou knowest us,\line pass in therefore by us." The ground of this Hall of Maati saith: "I\line will not let thee tread upon me [unless thou tellest me my name],\line for I am silent. I am holy because I know the names of two feet\line wherewith thou wouldst walk upon me. Declare, then, them to me."\line [And I reply], "Besu-Ahu" is the name of my right foot, and\line "Unpet-ent-Het-Heru" is the name of my left foot. [The ground\line replieth]: "Thou knowest us, enter in therefore over us." The\line Doorkeeper of this Hall of Maati saith: "I will not announce thee\line unless thou tellest my name." [And I reply], "Discerner of hearts,\line searcher of bellies" is thy name. [The Doorkeeper saith]: "Thou\line shalt be announced." [He saith]: "Who is the god who dwelleth in his\line hour? Speak it" [And I reply], "Au-taui." [He saith]: "Explain who\line he is." [And I reply], "Au-taui" is Thoth. "Come now," saith Thoth,\line "for what purpose hast thou come?" [And I reply]: "I have come, and\line have journeyed hither that my name may be announced [to the god]."\line [Thoth saith]: "In what condition art thou?" [And I reply], "I, even\line I, am purified from evil defects, and I am wholly free from the curses\line of those who live in their days, and I am not one of their number."\line [Thoth saith]: "Therefore shall [thy name] be announced to the god."\line [Thoth saith]: "Tell me, who is he whose heaven is of fire, whose\line walls are living serpents, and whose ground is a stream of water?\line Who is he?" [And I reply], "He is Osiris." [Thoth saith]: "Advance\line now, [thy name] shall be announced to him. Thy cakes shall come from\line the Utchat (Eye of Horus or Ra), thy ale shall come from the Utchat,\line and the offerings which shall appear to thee at the word upon earth\line [shall proceed] from the Utchat." This is what Osiris hath decreed for\line the steward of the overseer of the seal, Nu, whose word is truth.\line\line RUBRIC: THE MAKING OF THE REPRESENTATION OF WHAT SHALL HAPPEN IN\line THIS HALL OF MAATI. This Chapter shall be said by the deceased when he\line is cleansed and purified, and is arrayed in linen apparel, and is shod\line with sandals of white leather, and his eyes are painted with antimony,\line and his body is anointed with unguent made of myrrh. And he shall\line present as offerings oxen, and feathered fowl, and incense, and\line cakes and ale, and garden herbs. And behold, thou shalt draw a\line representation of this in colour upon a new tile moulded from earth\line upon which neither a pig nor any other animal hath trodden. And if\line this book be done [in writing, the deceased] shall flourish, and his\line children shall flourish, and [his name] shall never fall into\line oblivion, and he shall be as one who filleth the heart of the king and\line of his princes. And bread, and cakes, and sweetmeats, and wine, and\line pieces of flesh shall be given unto him [from among those which are]\line upon the altar of the Great God. And he shall not be driven back\line from any door in Amentet, and he shall be led along with the kings\line of the South and the kings of the North, and he shall be among the\line bodyguard of Osiris, continually and regularly for ever. [And he shall\line come forth in every form he pleaseth as a living soul for ever, and\line ever, and ever.]\line THE CHAPTER OF THE DEIFICATION OF THE MEMBERS\line\line The hair of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the hair of Nu.\line The face of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the face of Ra.\line The eyes of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the eyes of\line Hathor.\line The ears of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the ears of\line Up-uatu.\line The lips of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the lips of\line Anpu.\line The teeth of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the teeth of\line Serqet.\line The cheeks of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the cheeks of\line Isis.\line The arms of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the arms of\line Ba-neb-Tetu.\line The neck of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the neck of\line Uatchit.\line The throat of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the throat\line of Mert.\line The breast of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the breast\line of the Lady of Sais.\line The backbone of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the backbone\line of Set.\line The trunk of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the trunk of\line the Lords of Kher-aha.\line The flesh of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the flesh of\line Aa-shefit.\line The belly of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the belly of\line Sekhmet.\line The buttocks of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the\line buttocks of the Eye of Horus.\line The phallus of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, is the phallus\line of Osiris.\line The thighs of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the thighs of\line Nut.\line The feet of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the feet of\line Ptah.\line The fingers of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the\line fingers of Saah.\line The toes of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, are the toes of the\line Living Uraei.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Pyramid of Pepi I, ll. 565ff.)\line\line The head of this Meri-Ra is the head of Horus; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The skull of this Pepi is the Dekan star of the god; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The brow of this Meri-Ra is the brow of..... and Nu; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The face of this Pepi is the face of Up-uatu; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The eyes of this Meri-Ra are the eyes of the Great Lady, the first\line of the Souls of Anu; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into\line heaven.\line The nose of this Pepi is the nose of Thoth; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The mouth of this Meri-Ra is the mouth of Khens-ur; he cometh\line forth therefore, and ascendeth therefore, and ascendeth therefore into\line heaven.\line The tongue of this Pepi is the tongue of Maaa (Truth) in the Maat\line Boat; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The teeth of this Pepi are the teeth of the Souls of [Anu]; he\line cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The lips of this Meri-Ra are the lips of........; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The chin of this Pepi is the chin of Nest-khent-Sekhem (the throne\line of the First Lady of Sekhem); he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line The thes bone of this Pepi is the thes bone of the Bull Sma; he\line cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The soulders of this Pepi are the shoulders of Set; he cometh\line forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line [The...... of this Pepi].........; he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line [The......of this Pepi] ........of Baabu; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The breast of this Meri-Ra is the breast of Bast; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The belly of this Meri-Ra is the belly of Nut; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line [The........of this Pepi] ........; he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line [The........of this Pepi] .......of the two Companies of the gods;\line he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The two thighs of this Pepi are the two thighs of Heqet; he cometh\line forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The buttocks of this Meri-Ra are like the Semktet Boat and the\line Mantchet Boat; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The phallus of this Pepi is the phallus of the Hep Bull; he cometh\line forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The legs of this Meri-Ra are the legs of Net (Neith) and Serqet;\line he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The knees of this Meri-Ra are the knees of the twin Souls who are at\line the head of the Sekhet-Tcher; he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line The soles of this Meri-Ra are like the Maati Boat; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line The toes of this Pepi are the toes of the Souls of Anu; he cometh\line forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Now this Pepi is a god, the son of a god; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line This Pepi is the son of Ra, who loveth him; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Ra hath sent forth Meri-Ra; he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line Ra hath begotten [this] Pepi; he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line Ra hath given birth to Pepi; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth\line into heaven.\line This spell therefore is in the body of Meri-Ra; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line This Meri-Ra is the Power, the Great Power, among the Great\line Council of Chiefs in Anu; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into\line heaven.\line He worketh the boat; Pepi cometh forth therefore and ascendeth\line into heaven.\line [Pepi is] Horus, the nursling, the child; Meri-Ra cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Pepi hath not had union with Nut, she hath not given her hands to\line him; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Keb hath not removed the obstacles in his path; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line No god hath smitten the steps of this Meri-Ra; he come forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line [Though] Pepi is not censed is not mourned, hath not washed\line himself in the vessel, hath not smelt the haunch, hath not carried the\line meat-offering, hath not ploughed the earth, hath not dedicated an\line offering, he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Behold, it is not this Pepi who hath said these things to you, O\line ye gods, it is Heka who hath said these things to you, O ye gods,\line and this Meri-Ra is the support which is under Heka; he cometh forth\line therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Every god smiteth the feet of Pepi; he cometh forth therefore and\line ascendeth into heaven.\line He plougheth the earth, he dedicateth an offering, he bringeth the\line vessel of [blood], he smelleth the haunch, and he bringeth the meat\line offering; he cometh forth therefore and ascendeth into heaven.\line Every god graspeth the hand of Meri-Ra in heaven,\line\line He conducteth him to the House of Horus in the sky.\line The word of his Double is truth before Keb.\line\line\line THE CHAPTER OF REPULSING SLAUGHTER IN HENSU\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 6)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF DRIVING BACK THE SLAUGHTERS WHICH ARE PERFORMED IN\line HENSU. The Osiris Nu, whose word is truth, saith:- O thou land of\line the Sceptre! O thou White Crown of the divine form! O thou rest of the\line ferry-boat! I am the Child. (Repeat four times). Hail, Abu-ur! Thou\line sayest daily: "The slaughter-block is made ready as thou knowest,\line and thou hast come to destruction." I am Ra, who stablisheth those who\line praise him. I am the Knot of the god in the Aser tree, the twice\line beautiful one, who is more splendid to-day than yesterday. (Repeat\line four times). I am Ra, who stablisheth those who praise him. I am the\line Knot of the god within the Aser tree, and my appearance is the\line appearance [of Ra] on this day.\line My hair is the hair of Nu. My face is the face of the Disk. My\line eyes are the eyes of Hathor. My ears are the ears of Up-uat. My nose\line is the nose of Khenti-Khabas. My lips are the lips of Anpu. My teeth\line are the teeth of Serqet. My cheeks are the cheeks of the goddess Isis.\line My hands are the hands of Ba-neb-Tet. My forearms are the forearms\line of Neith, the Lady of Sais. My backbone is the backbone of Suti. My\line phallus is the phallus of Beba. My reins are the reins of the Lords of\line Kher-aha. My chest is the chest of Aa-shefit. My belly and back are\line the belly and back of Sekhmet. My buttocks are the buttocks of the Eye\line of Horus. My hips and legs are the hips and legs of Nut. My feet are\line the feet of Ptah. [My fingers] and my toes are the [fingers and]\line toes of the Living gods. There is no member of my body which is not\line the member of a god. Thoth protecteth my body altogether, and I am\line Ra day by day. I shall not be dragged back by my arms, and none\line shall lay violent hold upon my hands. And shall do me hurt neither\line men, nor gods, nor the Spirit-souls, nor the dead, nor any man, nor\line any pat-spirit, nor any rekhit-spirit, nor any hememet-spirit.\line I am he who cometh forth advancing, whose name is unknown. I am\line Yesterday. "Seer of Millions of Years" is my name. I pass along, I\line pass along the paths of the divine celestial judges. I am the Lord\line of Eternity: I decree and I judge like Khepera. I am the Lord of the\line Urrt Crown. I am he who dwelleth in the Utchat and in the Egg, and\line it is granted unto me to live therein. I am he who dwelleth in the\line Utchat when it closeth, and I exist by the strength thereof. I come\line forth and I shine; I enter in and I come to life. I am in the\line Utchat, my seat is upon my throne, and I sit in the tent chamber\line before it. I am Horus. [I] traverse millions of years. I have\line decreed [the stablishing] of my throne, and I am the ruler thereof;\line and in very truth my mouth keepeth an even balance both in speech\line and in silence. In very truth my forms are inverted. I am Un-Nefer,\line from one period even unto another, and what I have is within me. I\line am the only One, who proceedeth from an only One, who goeth round\line about in his course. I am he who dwelleth in the Utchat. No evil thing\line of any shape or kind shall spring up against me, and no baleful\line object, and no harmful thing, and no disastrous thing shall happen\line unto me. I open the door in heaven. I rule my throne. I open the way\line for the births which take place on this day. I am the child who\line traverseth the road of Yesterday. I am To-day for untold nations and\line peoples. I am he who protecteth you for millions of years. Whether\line ye be denizens of heaven, or of the earth, or of the South, or of\line the North, or of the East, or of the West, the fear of me is in your\line bodies. I am he whose being hath been wrought in his eye. I shall\line not die again. My moment is in your bodies, but my forms are in my\line place of habitation. I am "He who cannot be known." The Red Fiends\line have their faces directed against me. I am the unveiled one. The\line period when the heavens were created for me and were enlarged the\line bounds of earth, and multiplied the progeny thereof, cannot be found\line out. They shall fail and not be united again. By reason of the\line speech which I address to you, my name setteth itself apart from all\line things evil which are in the mouths of men. I am he who riseth and\line shineth, a wall which cometh out of a wall, an only One who proceedeth\line from an only One. There is never a day that passeth without the things\line which appertain unto him being therein; passing, passing, passing,\line passing. Verily I say unto thee, I am the Plant which cometh forth\line from Nu, and my mother is Nut. Hail, my creator, I am he who hath no\line power to walk, the Great Knot who dwelleth in Yesterday. The might\line of my strength is within my hand, I am not known [by thee], but I am\line he who knoweth thee. I cannot be held in the hand, but I am he who can\line hold thee in his hand. Hail, O Egg! Hail, O Egg! I am Horus who liveth\line for millions of years, whose flame shineth upon you, and bringeth your\line hearts unto me. I am master of my throne. I advance at this season.\line I have opened a path. I have delivered myself from all evil things.\line I am the golden dog-headed ape, three palms and two fingers [high],\line which hath neither arms nor legs, and which dwelleth in Het-ka-Ptah. I\line go forth as goeth forth the dog-headed ape who dwelleth in\line Het-ka-Ptah.\line\line RUBRIC: Behold the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, arrayed in\line fine linen, and shod with sandals of white [leather], and anointed\line with the very finest myrrh unguent. There are offered unto him a\line fine bull, and incense, and ra geese, and flowers, and ale, and cakes,\line and garden herbs. And behold, thou shalt draw a representation of a\line table of offerings on a clean tile with pure colours, and thou shalt\line bury it in a field whereon no swine hath trodden. And if a copy of\line this book be written upon it, he shall rise [again], and his\line children's children shall flourish and prosper, like unto Ra,\line without cessation. He shall be in high favour with the king, and\line with the shenit nobles of his court, and there shall be given unto him\line cakes and cups of drink, and portions of flesh, upon the altar-table\line of the Great God. He shall not thrust aside at any door in Amentet; he\line shall travel in the train of the Kings of the South and the Kings of\line the North, and he shall abide with the followers of Osiris near\line Un-Nefer, for ever, and for ever, and for ever.\line\line\line Vignette\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheet 24)\line\line The steward of the overseer of the seal, Nu, whose word is truth,\line begotten of the steward of the overseer of the seal, Amen-hetep, whose\line word is truth, saith:- Hail, ye Four Apes who sit in the bows of the\line Boat of Ra, who convey truth to Nebertcher, who sit in judgment on the\line oppressed man and on [his] oppressor, who make the gods to be\line contented by means of the flame of your mouths, who offer holy\line offerings to the gods, and sepulchral meals to the Spirit-souls, who\line live upon truth, and who feed upon truth of heart, who are without\line deceit and fraud, and to whom wickedness is an abomination, do ye away\line with my evil deeds, and put ye away my sins [which deserved stripes\line upon earth, and destroy ye every evil thing which appertaineth to me],\line and let there be no obstacle whatsoever on my part towards you. O\line grant ye that I may make my way through the Amehet, let me enter\line into Rasta, let me pass through the hidden pylons of Ament. O grant\line that there may be given unto me shens cakes, and ale, and persen\line cakes, even as to the living Spirit-souls, and grant that I may\line enter into and come forth from Rasta.\line [The Four Apes make answer, saying]: Come thou, for we have done\line away with thy wickedness, and we have put away thy sin, along with thy\line sins upon earth which deserved stripes, and we have destroyed every\line evil thing which appertained to thee upon earth. Enter, therefore,\line unto Rasta, and pass through the hidden pylons of Amentet, and there\line shall be given unto thee shens cakes, and ale, and persen cakes, and\line thou shalt come forth and shalt enter in at thy desire, even as do\line those who are favoured [of the God], and thou shalt be called [to\line partake of offerings] each day in the horizon.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF A TET OF GOLD. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth,\line saith:- Thou risest up for thyself, O Still-heart! Thou shinest for\line thyself, O Still-heart! Place thou thyself on thy base, I come, I\line bring unto thee a Tet of gold, thou shalt rejoice therein.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nebseni and the Papyrus of Nu)\line\line Rise up thou, O Osiris, thou hast thy backbaone, O Still-heart, thou\line hast thy neck vertebrae and thy back, O Still-heart! Place thou\line thyself on thy base. I put water beneath thee, and I bring unto thee a\line Tet of god that thou mayest rejoice therein.\line\line RUBRIC (From the Papyrus of Nu): [This Chapter] shall be recited\line over a Tet of gold set in a stand made of sycamore wood which hath\line been steeped in a tincture of ankhamu flowers, and it shall be\line placed on the neck of the deceased on the day of the funeral. If\line this amulet be placed on his neck he shall become a perfect Khu in\line Khert-Neter, and at the festivals of the New Year he shall be like\line unto the Followers of Osiris continually and for ever.\line\line RUBRIC (From the Turin Papyrus): [This Chapter] shall be said over a\line Tet of gold fashioned out of the trunk of a sycamore tree, and it\line shall be placed on the neck of the deceased. Then shall he enter in\line through the doors of the Tuat. His words whall be silenced. He shall\line place himself on the ground on New Year's Day among the Followers of\line Osiris.\line If this Chapter be known by the deceased he shall live like a\line perfect Khu in Khert-Neter. He shall not be sent back from the doors\line of Amentet. There shall be given to him the shens cake, and a cup of\line wine, and the persen cake, and slices of meat on the altars of Ra,\line or as some read, Osiris Un-Nefer. And his word shall be truth before\line his enemies in Khert-Neter continually, and for ever and for ever.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF A TET OF CARNELIAN. The Osiris Ani, whose word is\line truth, saith:- The blood of Isis, the spells of Isis, the magical\line powers of Isis, shall make this great one strong, and shall be an\line amulet of protection [against him] that would do to him the things\line which he abominateth.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line\line RUBRIC (From the Papyrus of Nu): [This Chapter] shall be said over a\line Tet of carnelian, which hath been washed in a tincture of ankhamu\line flowers, and is fashioned out of the trunk of a sycamore tree. It\line shall be placed on the neck of the deceased on the day of the funeral.\line If this be done for him the magical powers of Isis will protect his\line members. Horus, the son of Isis, shall rejoice when he seeth him. [No]\line road shall be blocked to him. His hand shall be to heaven, his hand\line shall be to earth, for ever. Do not let anyone see him. Verily....\line\line RUBRIC (From the Saite Recension): [This Chapter] shall be said over\line a Tet of carnelian, anointed with a tincture of ankhamu flowers,\line made from the trunk of a sycamore tree. It shall be placed on the neck\line of the Khu. If this book be done for him, the magical spells of Isis\line shall protect him, and Horus the son of Isis shall rejoice [when] he\line seeth him. No road shall be blocked to him. His hand shall be to\line heaven, his hand shall be to earth....... If this book be known by him\line he shall be in the following of Osiris Un-Nefer, and his word shall be\line truth in Khert-Neter. The doors in Khert-Neter shall be opened to him.\line Wheat and barley shall be given to him in Sekhet-Aanru. His name shall\line be like [the names of] the gods who are there, the Followers of\line Horus who reap.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF A HEART OF SEHERT STONE. The Osiris Ani, whose word\line is truth, saith:- I am the Benu bird, the Heart-soul of Ra, the\line guide of the gods to the Tuat. Their Heart-souls come forth upon earth\line to do what their KAU wish to do, and the Heart-soul of the Osiris\line Ani shall come forth to do what his Ka wisheth to do.\line\line THE CHAPTER OF THE HEAD-REST, which is to be placed under the head\line of the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth. Awake out of thy sufferings, O\line thou who liest prostrate! Awake thou! Thy head is in the horizon. I\line lift thee up, O thou whose word is truth. Ptah hath overthrown thine\line enemies for thee. Thine enemies have fallen, and they shall never more\line exist, O Osiris.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nebseni, Sheet 21)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF THE HEAD-REST [OR PILLOW]. Awake out of thy\line sufferings, O thou who liest prostrate. They (the gods) keep watch\line over thy head in the horizon. Thou art lifted up, thy word is truth in\line respect of the things which have been done by thee. Ptah hath cast\line down headlong thine enemies. This work was ordered to be done for\line thee. Thou art Horus, the son of Hathor, Nesert, Nesertet, who\line giveth back the head after it hath been cut off. Thy head shall not be\line carried away from thee, after [it hath been cut off]; thy head shall\line be carried away from thee, never, never!\line THE TEXTS IN THE FUNERAL CHAMBER\line\line SPEECH OF ISIS. Isis saith:- I have come to be a protector unto\line thee. I waft unto thee air for thy nostrils, and the north wind\line which cometh forth from the god Tem unto thy nose. I have made whole\line for thee thy windpipe. I make thee to live like a god. Thine enemies\line have fallen under thy feet. I have made thy word to be true before\line Nut, and thou art mighty before the gods.\line\line SPEECH OF NEPHTHYS. Nephthys saith unto the Osiris Ani, whose word\line is truth:- I go round about thee to protect thee, O brother Osiris.\line I have come to be a protector unto thee. [My strength shall be near\line thee, my strength shall be near thee, for ever. Ra hath heard thy cry,\line and the gods have made thy word to be truth. Thou art raised up. Thy\line word is truth in respect of what hath been done unto thee. Ptah hath\line overthrown thy foes, and thou art Horus, the son of Hathor.]\line\line SPEECH OF THE TET. I have come quickly, and I have driven back the\line footsteps of th god whose face is hidden. I have illumined his\line sanctuary. I stand near the god Tet on the day of repelling\line disaster. I watch to protect thee, O Osiris.\line\line SPEECH OF KESTA (Mesta). I am Kesta, thy son, O Osiris Ani, whose\line word is truth. I come to protect thee. I will make thy house to\line flourish, permanently, even as Ptah hath commanded me, and as Ra\line himself hath commanded.\line\line SPEECH OF HAPI. I am Hapi, thy son, O Osiris Ani, whose word is\line truth. I come to protect thee. I bind together thy head and the\line members of thy body. I smite down for thee thine enemies under thee. I\line give unto thee thy head for ever and for ever, O Osiris Ani, whose\line word is truth, whose word is truth in peace.\line\line SPEECH OF TUAMUTEF. Tuamutef saith:- I am thy son Horus, who\line loveth thee. I come to avenge thee, O my father Osiris, upon him\line that did evil unto thee. I have set him under thy feet for ever and\line for ever, permanently, permanently, O Osiris Ani, whose word is truth,\line whose word is truth.\line\line SPEECH OF QEBHSENUF. Qebsenuf saith:- I am thy son, O Osiris Ani,\line whose word is truth. I come to protect thee. I have collected thy\line bones and I have gathered together thy members. [I have brought thy\line heart, and I have placed it upon its throne within thy body. I make\line thy house to flourish after thee, O thou who livest for ever.]\line\line SPEECH OF THE FLAME. I protect thee with this flame. I drive him\line [the foe] away from the valley of the tomb. I cast the sand about [thy\line feet]. I embrace the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace.\line\line SPEECH OF THE FLAME. I come to hew in pieces. I have not been hewn\line in pieces, and I will not permit thee to be hewn in pieces. I come\line to do violence [to thy foe], but I will not permit violence to be done\line unto thee. I protect thee.\line\line A SOUL SAITH:- The Osiris Ani, whose is truth, praiseth Ra when he\line rolleth up into the sky in the eastern horizon of heaven.\line\line A SOUL SAITH:- The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, in peace in\line Khert-Neter, praiseth Ra when he setteth in the western horizon of\line heaven, [and saith], "I am a perfect soul."\line\line SPEECH OF ANI. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- I am a\line perfect soul dwelling in the divine egg of the Abtu Fish. I am the\line Great Cat which dwelleth in the Seat of Truth, wherein the god Shu\line riseth.\line\line SPEECH OF THE USHABTI FIGURE [THE CHAPTER OF NOT DOING WORK IN\line KHERT-NETER]. Illumine the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth. Hail,\line Shabti Figure! If the Osiris Ani be decreed to do any of the work\line which is to be done in Khert-Neter, let everything which standeth in\line the way be removed from him- whether it be to plough the fields, or to\line fill the channels with water, or to carry sand from [the East to the\line West]. The Shabti Figure replieth: I will do it, verily I am here\line [when] thou callest.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu and the Papyrus of Nebseni)\line\line The Speech of Anpu: Anubis the dweller in the mummy chamber,\line Governor of the Divine House, layeth his hands upon the lord of\line life, the scribe, the draughtsman of Ptah, Nebseni, the lord of\line fealty, begotten of the scribe and mason Thena, born of the lady of\line the house Mut-rest, whose word is truth, and devoting himself to him\line as his guardian, saith:- Homage to thee, thou happy one, lord! Thou\line seest the Utchat. Ptah-Seker hath bound thee up. Anpu hath exalted\line thee. Shu hath raised thee up, O Beautiful Face, thou governor of\line eternity. Thou hast thine eye, O scribe Nebseni, lord of fealty, and\line it is beautiful. Thy right eye is like the Sektet Boat, thy left eye\line is like the Atet Boat. Thine eyebrows are fair to see in the\line presence of the Company of the Gods. Thy brow is under the\line protection of Anpu, and thy head and face, O beautiful one, are before\line the holy Hawk. Thy fingers have been stablished by thy scribe's\line craft in the presence of the Lord of Khemenu, Thoth, who hath bestowed\line upon thee the knowledge of the speech of the holy books. Thy beard\line is beautiful in the sight of Ptah-Seker, and thou, O scribe Nebseni,\line thou lord of fealty, art beautiful before the Great Company of the\line Gods. The Great God looketh upon thee, and he leadeth thee along the\line path of happiness. Sepulchral meals are bestowed upon thee, and he\line overthroweth for thee thine enemies, setting them under thy feet in\line the presence of the Great Company of the Gods who dwell in the House\line of the Great Aged One which is in Anu.\line\line [HERE] BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF SEKHET-HETEPET, AND THE CHAPTERS OF\line COMING FORTH BY DAY, OF ENTERING INTO AND COMING FORTH FROM\line KHERT-NETER, OF ARRIVING IN SEKHET-AANRU, AND OF LIVING IN PEACE IN\line THE GREAT CITY, THE LADY OF WINDS. [The Osiris the scribe Ani, whose\line word is truth, saith:-] Let me be master there. Let me be a khu there.\line Let me plough there. Let me reap there. Let me eat there. Let me drink\line there. [Let me beget there]. Let me do there all the things which\line one doeth upon earth. The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:-\line Horus vanquished Set when [he] looked at the building of\line Sekhet-Hetepet. [He] spread air over the Divine Soul in its Egg, in\line its day. He delivered the interior of the body of Horus [from the\line Akeru Gods]. I have crowned him in the House of Shu. His house is\line the stars. Behold, I take up my place in its nomes. He hath guided the\line hearts of the Company of the Firstborn Gods. He hath reconciled the\line Two Fighters (Horus and Set), the guardians of life. He hath done what\line is fair, bringing an offering. He hath reconciled the Two Fighters\line with him that belongeth to them. He hath cut off the hairy scalp of\line the Two Fighters. He hath destroyed the revolts of [their] children. I\line have done away all the evil which attacked their souls. I am master in\line [Sekhet-Hetepet]. I know it. I have sailed over its lakes that I might\line arrive at the cities thereof. I have made strong my mouth. The\line Spirit-souls are ready [to fight], but they shall not gain the mastery\line over me. I am equipped in thy Fields, O god Hetep. What thou wishest\line thou shalt do, [saith this god].\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nebseni, Sheet 17)\line\line HERE BEGIN THE CHAPTERS OF SEKHET-HETEPET, AND THE CHAPTERS OF\line COMING FORTH BY DAY; OF GOING INTO AND OF COMING FORTH FROM\line KHERT-NETER; OF ARRIVAL IN SEKHET-AARU; OF LIVING IN SEKHET-HETEPET,\line THE MIGHTY CITY, THE LADY OF WINDS; OF HAVING POWER THEREIN; OF\line BECOMING A SPIRIT-SOUL THERE; OF PLOUGHING THERE; OF REAPING THERE; OF\line EATING THERE; OF DRINKING THERE; OF MAKING LOVE THERE; AND OF DOING\line EVERYTHING THERE EVEN AS A MAN DOETH UPON EARTH. NEBSENI, THE SCRIBE\line AND DRAUGHTSMAN OF PTAH, SAITH:- Set vanguished Horus, who was looking\line at the building in Sekhet-Hetepet. I set free Horus from Set. Set\line opened the paths of the Two Eyes (the Sun and Moon) in the sky. Set\line ejected water with air upon the soul of his Eye, which dwelt in the\line town of Mert; he delivered the interior of the body of Horus from\line the hands of the Akeru Gods. Behold me! I paddle this great boat\line over the Lake of the god Hetep; I seized upon it in the mansion of\line Shu. The mansion of his stars reneweth youth, reneweth youth. I paddle\line over the Lakes thereof so that I may arrive at the towns thereof. I\line sail up to the town of the god Hetep.... Behold, I am at peace with\line his times, and with his guidance, and with his will, and with the\line Company of the Gods, who are his firstborn. He maketh the Two Fighters\line (Horus and Set) to be at peace [with each other], and to keep ward\line over the living whom he hath created in fair form, and he bringeth\line peace; he maketh the Two Fighters to be at peace with those who\line watch over them. He cutteth off the hair from their divine fighters,\line he driveth away storm from the children. He guardeth from attack the\line Spirits. I have gained power therein. I know it. I have sailed over\line its Lakes so that I might arrive at its towns. My mouth is strong. I\line am equipped against the Spirits. They shall not gain the mastery\line over me. I am rewarded [with] these thy Fields, O god Hetep. What thou\line wishest that do thou, O lord of the winds. I shall be a spirit\line therein. I shall eat therein. I shall drink therein. I shall plough\line therein. I shall reap the grain therein. I shall be strong therein.\line I shall make love therein. My words shall be strong therein. I shall\line not be in subjection therein. I shall be a man of might therein.\line Thou hast made strong the mouth and throat. Hetep Qettbu is its\line name. [It is] stablished upon the pillars of Shu, and is linked with\line the pleasant things of Ra. He is the divider of years, the hidden of\line mouth; silent is his mouth, hidden is what he uttereth, he\line fulfilleth eternity, he taketh possession of everlastingness of\line existence as Hetep, Neb-Hetep. Horus maketh himself strong like unto a\line hawk which is one thousand cubits in length, and two thousand cubits\line in life. He that equipments with him, he journeyeth on, he cometh to\line the place where his heart would be, among the Lakes which are in its\line towns. He begetteth in the birth-chamber of the god of the town, he is\line satisfied with the food of the god of the town; he doeth what ought to\line be done there, in the Field of Smas-er-Khet..... everything of the\line birth-chamber of the god of the town. Now [when he] setteth in the\line [land of] life like crystal he performeth everything therein, [which\line things are] like unto the things done in the Lake Neserser, wherein\line there is none that rejoiceth, and wherein are evil things of all\line kinds. The god Hetep goeth in and cometh out, and marcheth hither\line and thither in the Field of Smas-er-Khet, the Lady of the\line birth-chamber of the god of the town. [Let me] live with the god\line Hetep, clothed, and not despoiled by the Lords of the North, and may\line the Lord of things bring food unto me. May he make me to go forward.\line May I come forth. May he bring to me my Power there, may I receive it,\line and may I be rewarded by the god Hetep. May I be master of the great\line and mighty word in my body in this my place. Make me to remember it.\line Let me [not] forget it. Let me go forward, let me plough. I am at\line peace with the god of the town. I know the water, the towns, the\line nomes, and the lakes which are in Sekhet-Hetepet. I live therein. I am\line strong therein. I shine therein. I eat therein. I..... therein. I reap\line the harvest therein. I plough therein. I beget children therein. I\line am at peace therein with the god Hetep. Behold I sow seed therein. I\line sail about on the lakes thereof, and I arrive at its towns, O god\line Hetep. Behold my mouth is equipped, it possesseth horns . Give unto me\line the abundance of the KAU (Doubles) and Spirit-souls. He who counteth\line me is Shu. I know him not. I come to its towns. I sail over its lakes.\line I walk about in Sekhet-Hetepet. Behold, it is Ra who is in heaven.\line Behold, it is Hetep [who is] its double offering of peace. I have\line advanced to its territory. I have put on my apparel. I have come\line forth. I have given what it was upon me to give. I have made glad in\line [my] heart. I have conquered. I am strong. I have given directions\line to Hetep.\line [Hail], Unen-em-hetep, I have come to thee. My soul followeth me.\line The god Hu is on my hands. [Hail], Nebt-taui, in whom I remember and\line forget, I have become alive. I have attacked none, let none attack me.\line I have given, give thou to me gladness. Make thou me to be at peace,\line bind thou up my veins, let [me] receive air. [Hail], Unen-em-hetep,\line the Lord of Winds. I have come there. I have opened my head. Ra\line sleepeth. I watch not, [for] the goddess Hetemet is at the door of\line heaven by night. Obstacles have been put before, but I have\line collected his emissions. I am in my city. O Nut-urt (Great City), I\line have come into thee. I have counted up my abundant stores. I advance\line on my way to Uakh. I am the Bull which is tied with a rope of\line lapis-lazuli, the lord of the Field of the Bull, the lord of the words\line of the god, the goddess Septet (Sothis) at her hours. O Uakh, I have\line come into thee. I have eaten my food. I am master of choice pieces\line of the flesh of oxen and of feathered fowl, and the birds of Shu\line have been given unto me. I follow the gods, and I come [after the\line Doubles]. O Tcheft, I have come into thee. I array myself in\line apparel, and I gird about myself the sat garment of Ra. Behold the\line Court of the sky, and the followers of Ra who dwell in heaven. O\line Un-em-hetep, the lord of the Two Lands, I have come into thee. I\line have plunged into the Lakes of Tchesert; behold, impurity of every\line kind hath removed from me. The divine Great One flourisheth therein.\line Behold, I have found [him]. I have netted geese, and have fed full\line upon the finest of them. O Qenqentet, I have come into thee. I have\line seen the Osiris [my father]. I have saluted my mother. I have begotten\line children. I have snared the serpents, and I am delivered. I know the\line name of the god who is with the goddess Tchesert, and who hath\line straight hair, and is equipped with horns [ready to gore]. He reapeth,\line and I both plough and reap. O Hetemet, I have entered into thee. I\line have approached the lapis-lazuli. I have followed the winds of the\line Company of the Gods. The Great God hath given my head unto me. He\line who hath bound my head on my body for me is the Mighty One, with\line eyes of lapis-lazuli, namely, Ari-en-ab-f ("He doeth as he pleaseth").\line O Usert, I have come into thee, to the house wherein food is brought\line unto me. O Smam, I have come into thee. My heart watcheth, my head\line is equipped with the White Crown. I act as the guide of the\line celestial beings. I make to flourish terrestrial beings. There is\line joy of heart for the Bull, and for the celestial beings, and for the\line Company of the Gods. I am the god, the Bull, the Lord of the gods, who\line maketh his way over the turquoise. O wheat and barley of the nome of\line the god, I have come into thee. I have come forward. I have lifted\line [you] up, following the best offerings of the Company of the Gods. I\line have moored my boat to the tying-up post in the lakes of the celestial\line beings. I have pulled up the typing-up post. I have recited words, and\line I have ascribed praises unto the gods who dwell in Sekhet-Hetepet.\line THE CHAPTER OF PROVIDING THE DECEASED WITH MEAT, MILK, ETC.\line\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, saith:- Homage to thee, O Ra,\line the Lord of Truth, the Only One, the Lord of Eternity and Maker of\line Everlastingness. I have come before thee, O my Lord Ra. I would make\line to flourish the Seven Cows and their Bull. O ye who give cakes and ale\line to the Spirit-souls, grant ye that my soul may be with you. Let him be\line born on your thighs. Let him be like unto one of you for ever and\line for ever. Let the Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, have glorious power\line in the Beautiful Amentet.\line\line\line The Names of the Seven Holy Cows and their Bull:\line\line 1. Het-Kau Nebtertcher.\line 2. Akertkhentetasts.\line 3. Khebitetsahneter.\line 4. Urmertusteshertshenti.\line 5. Khnemtemankhanuit.\line 6. Sekhmetrensemabats.\line 7. Shenatpetuthestneter.\line\line Bull: Kathaihemt.\line\line\line ADDRESSES TO THE FOUR RUDDERS OF HEAVEN\line\line Hail, thou Beautiful Power, thou Beautiful Rudder of the Northern\line Heaven.\line Hail, thou who circlest, Guide of the Two Lands, Beautiful Rudder of\line the Western Heaven.\line Hail, Splendour, Dweller in the temple of the Ashemu gods, Beautiful\line Rudder of the Eastern Heaven.\line Hail, Dweller in the temple of the Red gods, Beautiful Rudder of the\line Southern Heaven.\line\line\line\line ADDRESSES TO THE FOUR COMAPNIES OF THE GODS\line\line Hail, ye gods who are above the earth, ye Guides of the Tuat.\line Hail, ye Mother-goddesses, who are above the earth in Khert-Neter,\line in the House of Osiris.\line Hail, ye gods who guide Ta-tchesert, who are above the earth and are\line guides of the Tuat.\line Hail, ye Followers of Ra, who follow in the train of Osiris.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Nu)\line\line RUBRIC: [These words] shall be said when Ra appeareth over [figures]\line of these gods written in colour upon a tablet, and thou shalt place\line offerings of tchefau food before them, cakes, ale, flesh, geese, and\line incense. They shall cause the deceased to enjoy the "offerings which\line come forth at the word [of command]" before Ra; and they shall give\line the deceased an abundance of food in Khert-Neter, and shall deliver\line him from every evil thing whatsoever. And thou shalt not recite this\line Book of Un-Nefer in the presence of anyone except thine own self. If\line this be done for the deceased Ra shall be a rudder for him, and\line shall be to him a strong protecting power, and he shall destroy all\line his enemies for him in Khert-Neter, and in heaven, and upon earth, and\line in every place whereinsoever he may enter, and he shall enjoy\line celestial food regularly and continually for ever.\line\line\line\line (From the Saite Recension)\line\line THE BOOK OF MAKING PERFECT THE KHU in the heart of Ra, of making him\line to have the mastery before Tem, of magnifying him before Osiris, of\line making him mighty before Khent-Amentet, and of setting awe of him\line before the Company of the Gods. It shall be recited on the day of\line the New Moon, on the sixth day festival, on the fifteenth day\line festival, on the festival of Uak, on the festival of Thoth, on the\line Birthday of Osiris, on the festival of Menu, on the night of Heker,\line [during] the Mysteries of the Tuat, during the celebration of the\line Mysteries in Akertet, at the smiting of the emissions, at the\line passage of the Funerary Valley, [and] the Mysteries...... [The recital\line thereof] will make the heart of the Khu to flourish and will make long\line his strides, and will make him to advance, and will make his face\line bright, and will make it to penetrate to the God. Let no man witness\line [the recital] except the king and the Kherheb priest, but the\line servant who cometh to minister outside shall not see it. Of the Khu\line for whom this Book shall be recited, his soul shall come forth by\line day with the living, he shall have power among the gods, and it will\line make him irresisitible for ever and ever. These gods shall go round\line about him, and shall acknowledge him. He shall be one of them. [This\line Book] shall make him to know how he came into being in the\line beginning. This Book is indeed a veritable mystery. Let no stranger\line anywhere have knowledge of it. Do not speak about it to any man. Do\line not repeat it. Let no [other] eye see it. Let no [other] ear hear\line it. Let no one see it except [thyself] and him who taught [it to\line thee]. Let not the multitude [know of it] except thyself and the\line beloved friend of thy heart. Thou shalt do this book in the seh\line chamber on a cloth painted with the stars in colour all over it. It is\line indeed a mystery. The dwellers in the swamps of the Delta nad\line everywhere there shall not know it. It shall provided the Khu with\line celestial food upon in Khert-Neter. It shall supply his Heart-soul\line with food upon earth. It shall make him to live for ever. No [evil]\line thing shall have the master over him.\line\line THE ADDRESSES OF THE FOUR RUDDERS\line\line Hail, Power of Heaven, Opener of the Disk, thou Beautiful Rudder\line of the Northern Heaven.\line Hail, Ra, Guide of the Two Lands, thou Beautiful Rudder of the\line Western Heaven.\line Hail, Khu, Dweller in the House of the Akhemu gods, thou Beautiful\line Rudder of the Eastern Heaven.\line Hail, Governor, Dweller in the House of the Tesheru Gods, thou\line Beautiful Rudder of the Southern Heaven.\line\line Grant ye cakes, and ale and tchefau food to the Osiris Auf-ankh,\line whose word is truth.\line\line Hail, Father of the Gods! Hail, Mother of teh Gods in Khert-Neter!\line Deliver ye the Osiris from every evil thing, from every evil\line obstruction, from every dire attack of an enemy, and from that\line deadly snarer with knife-like words, and from men, and gods, and\line Spirit-souls, and the damned, on this day, on this night, on this\line present festival of the fifteenth day, and in this year, and from\line the things of evil thereof.\line HYMN TO OSIRIS KHENTI-AMENTI UN-NEFER\line\line The Osiris Ani, whose word is truth, praiseth Osiris Khenti-Amenti\line Un-Nefer, and saith:- Hail, my Lord, who dost hasten through eternity,\line whose existence is for ever, Lord of Lords, King of Kings,\line Sovereign, God of the Gods, who live in their shrines,.... gods....\line men. Make thou for me a seat with those who are in Khert-Neter, who\line adore the forms of thy KA, and who traverse millions of millions of\line years....... May no delay arise for thee in Ta-mera. Let them come\line to thee, all of them, great as well as small. May this god give the\line power to enterin and to come forth from Khert-Neter, without\line repulse, at any door of the Tuat, to the KA of the Osiris Ani.\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line (From the Papyrus of Sutimes)\line\line SUTIMES, THE LIBATIONER AND PRESIDENT OF THE ALTAR CHAMBER OF THE\line APTS, DIRECTOR OF THE SCRIBES OF AMEN, WHOSE WORD IS TRUTH, PRAISETH\line OSIRIS, AND DOETH HOMAGE TO THE LORD OF ETERNITY, AND SATISFIETH THE\line WILL OF THE GOD, AND SPEAKETH TRUTH, THE LORD OF WHICH IS UNKNOWN, AND\line SAITH:- Homage to thee, O thou Holy God, thou mighty and beneficent\line being, thou Prince of Eternity, who dwellest in thy abode in the\line Sektet Boat, whose risings are manifold in the Atet Boat, unto whom\line praises are rendered in heaven and upon earth. Peoples and nations\line exalt thee, and the awe of thy terror is in the hearts of men, and\line Spirt-souls, and the dead. Thy soul dwelleth in Tetu, and the awe of\line thee is in Hensu. Thou settest the visible emblems of thyself in\line Anu, and the majesty of thy transformations in the holy place. I\line have come unto thee. Truth is in my heart, and in my breast there is\line neither craft nor guile. Grant thou that I may have my being among the\line living, and that I may sail up and down the river among those who\line are in thy following.\line THE CHAPTER OF THE PRAISE OF HATHOR, LADY OF AMENTET\line\line Hathor, Lady of Amentet, the Dweller in the Great Land, the Lady\line of Ta-Tchesert, the Eye of Ra, the Dweller in his breast, the\line Beautiful Face in the Boat of Millions of Years, the Seat of Peace\line of the doer of truth, Dweller in the Boat of the favoured ones.....\line APPENDIX\line APPENDIX\line THE CHAPTER OF THE FOUR TORCHES\line (From the Papyrus of Nu, Sheets 26 and 27)\line\line THE CHAPTER OF THE FOUR LIGHTED LAMPS WHICH ARE MADE FOR THE\line SPIRIT-SOUL. Behold, thou shalt make four rectangular troughs of\line clay wherein thou shalt scatter incense, and thou shalt fill them with\line the milk of a white cow, and by means of these thou shalt extinguish\line the lamps. The Osiris Nu, the steward of the overseer of the seal,\line whose word is truth, saith:- The fire cometh to thy KA, O Osiris\line Khenti-Amenti! The fire cometh to thy KA, O Osiris Nu, whose word is\line truth. The ordering of the night cometh after the day. [The fire\line cometh to thy KA, O Osiris, Governor of those who are in Amenti],\line and the two sisters of Ra come likewise. Behold it (the fire) riseth\line in Abtu, and it cometh; I cause it to come, the Eye of Horus. It is\line set in order upon thy brow, O Osiris Khenti-Amenti; it is set in thy\line shrine and riseth on thy brow; it is set on thy brow, O Osiris Nu,\line it is set on thy brow. The Eye of Horus protecteth thee, O Osiris\line Khenti-Amenti, and it keepeth thee in safety; it casteth down headlong\line all thine enemies for thee, and all thine enemies have fallen down\line headlong before thee. O Osiris Nu, the Eye of Horus protecteth thee,\line it keepeth thee in safety, and it casteth down headlong all thine\line enemies. Thine enemies have fallen down headlong before thy KA, O\line Osiris Khenti-Amenti. The Eye of Ra protecteth thee, it keepeth thee\line in safety, and it hath cast down headlong all thine enemies. Thine\line enemies have fallen down headlong before thy KA, O Osiris Nu, whose\line word is truth. The Eye of Horus protecteth thee, it keepeth thee in\line safety, it hath cast down headlong for thee all thine enemies, and\line thine enemies have fallen down headlong before thee. The Eye of\line Horus cometh. It is sound and well, it sendeth forth light even as\line doth Ra in the horizon. It covereth the powers of Suti with\line darkness, it mastereth him, and it bringeth its flame against him by\line its own command. The Eye of Horus is sound and well, thou eatest the\line flesh thereof, thy body possesseth it. Thou acclaimest it. The Four\line Fires enter into thy KA, O Osiris Khenti-Amenti, the Four Fires\line enter into thy KA, O Osiris Nu, the steward of the overseer of the\line seal, whose word is truth.\line Hail, ye sons of Horus, Kesta, Hapi, Tuamutef, and Qebhsenuf, ye\line have given your protection to your divine Father Osiris Khenti-Amenti,\line give ye your protection to the Osiris Nu, whose word is truth. Now\line therefore, inasmuch as ye have destroyed the Opponent of Osiris\line Khenti-Amenti, who liveth with the gods, having smitten Suti with\line his right hand and arm when dawn came upon the earth, and Horus hath\line become master [of Suti], and hath avenged his divine Father himself;\line and inasmuch as your divine Father hath been made to flourish\line through the union of the KA of Osiris Khenti-Amenti, whch ye effected,\line and the Eye of Horus hath avenged him, and hath protected him, and\line hath cast down headlong for him all his enemies, and all his enemies\line have fallen down before him, even so do ye destroy the Opponent of the\line Osiris Nu, the steward of the overseer of the seal, whose word is\line truth. Let him live with the gods, let him smite his enemy, let him\line destroy him, when light dawneth on the earth. Let Horus be master\line and avenge the Osiris Nu, and let the Osiris Nu flourish through his\line union with his KA which ye have effected. O Osiris Nu, the Eye of\line Horus hath avenged thee. It hath cast down headlong all thine\line enemies for thee, and all thine enemies have been cast down headlong\line before thee.\line Hail, Osiris Khenti-Amenti, grant thou light and fire to the perfect\line Heart-soul which is in Hensu. And [O ye Sons of Horus], grant ye power\line unto the living heart-soul of the Osiris Nu by means of his fire.\line Let him not be repulsed, and let him not be driven back at the doors\line of Amentet! Let his offerings of bread and of linen garments be\line brought unto him among the lords of funeral oblations. O offer ye\line praises, as unto a god to the Osiris Nu, the destroyer of his Opponent\line in his form of Truth, and in his attributes of a god of truth.\line\line RUBRIC: [This Chapter] shall be recited over four torches of atma\line cloth, which hath been anointed with the finest Thehennu unguent,\line and the torches shall be placed in the hands of four men who shall\line have the names of the pillars of Horus written upon their shoulders,\line and they shall burn the torches in the beautiful light of Ra, and this\line shall confer power and might upon the Spirit-soul of the deceased\line among the stars which never set. If this Chapter be recited for him he\line shall never, never perish, and he shall become a living soul for ever.\line These torches shall make the Spirit-soul to flourish like Osiris\line Khenti-Amenti, regularly and continually for ever. It is a struggle.\line Thou shalt not perform this ceremony before any human being except\line thine own self, or thy father, or thy son, because it is an\line exceedingly great mystery of the Amentet, and it is a type of the\line hidden things of the Tuat. When this ceremony hath been performed\line for the deceased, the gods, and the Spirit-souls, and the dead shall\line see him in the form of Khenti-Amenti, and he shall have power and\line dominion like this god.\line\line If thou shalt undertake to perform for the deceased that which is\line ordered in this "Chapter of the four blazing torches," each day,\line thou shalt cause the form of the deceased to come forth from every\line hall [in the Tuat], and from the Seven Halls of Osiris. And he shall\line live in the form of the God. He shall have power and dominion\line corresponding to those of the gods and the Spirit-souls for ever and\line ever. He shall enter in through the secret pylons and shall not be\line turned back in the presence of Osiris. And it shall come to pass,\line provided that the following things be done for him, that he shall\line enter in and come forth. He shall not be turned back. No boundary\line shall be set to his goings, and the sentence of the doom shall not\line be passed upon him on the Day of the Weighing of Words before\line Osiris- never, never.\line And thou shalt perform whatsoever [is written in] this book on\line behalf of the deceased, who shall thereby become perfect and pure. And\line thou shalt "open his mouth" with the instrument of iron. And thou\line shalt write down these things in accordance with the instructions\line which are found in the books of Prince Herutataf, who discovered\line them in a secret coffer (now they were in the handwriting of the god\line [Thoth] himself and had been deposited in the Temple of the goddess\line Unnut, the Lady of Unu) during a journey which he was making in\line order to inspect the temples, and the temple-estates, and the\line sanctuaries of the gods. And thou shalt perform these ceremonies\line secretly in the Tuat-chamber of the tomb, for they are mysteries of\line the Tuat, and they are symbolic of the things which are done in\line Khert-Neter.\line And thou shalt say: I have come, I have advanced hastily. I cast\line light upon his (the deceased's) footsteps. I am hidden, but I cast\line light upon his hidden place. I stand up close to the Tet. I stand up\line close to the Tet of Ra, I turn back the slaughter. I am protecting\line thee, O Osiris.\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter shall be recited over a Tet of crystal, which\line shall be set upon a brick made of crude mud, whereupon this Chapter\line hath been inscribed. Thou shalt make a cavity in the west wall [of the\line tomb], and having turned the front of the Tet towards the east, thou\line shalt wall up the cavity with mud which hath been mixed with extract\line of cedar. This Tet shall drive away the enemies of Osiris who would\line set themselves at the east wall [of the tomb].\line\line And thou shalt say: I have driven back thy foes. I keep watch over\line thee. He that is upon his mountain (Anpu) keepeth watch over thee\line ready for the moment when thy foes shall attack thee, and he shall\line repulse them for thee. I will drive back the Crocodile at the moment\line when it attacketh thee, and I will protect thee, O Osiris Nu.\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter shall be recited over a figure of Anpu made\line of crude mud mixed with incense. And the figure shall be set upon a\line brick made of crude mud, whereupon this Chapter hath been inscribed.\line Thou shalt make a cavity in the east wall, and having turned the\line face of the figure of Anpu towards the west wall [therein] thou\line shalt wall up the cavity. This figure shall repulse the enemies of\line Osiris, who would set themselves at the south wall.\line\line And thou shalt say; I am the belt of sand round about the hidden\line coffer. I turn back the force of the blazing fire of the funerary\line mountain. I traverse the roads, and I protect the Osiris Nu, the\line steward of the overseer of the seal, whose word is truth.\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter shall be recited over a brick made of crude mud\line whereon a copy of this Chapter hath been inscribed. And thou shalt\line place a reed in the middle thereof, and thou shalt smear it with\line pitch, and set light thereto. Then thou shalt make a cavity in the\line south wall, and, having turned the front of the brick towards the\line north, thou shalt wall the brick up inside it. [It shall repulse the\line enemies of the Osiris Nu] who would assemble at the north wall.\line\line And thou shalt say: O thou who comest to set fire [to the tomb or\line mummy], I will not let thee do it. O thou who comest to cast fire\line [herein], I will not let thee do it. I will burn thee, and I will cast\line fire upon thee. I protect the Osiris Nu, the steward of the overseer\line of the seal, whose word is truth.\line\line RUBRIC: This Chapter shall be recited over a brick of crude mud,\line whereon a copy of this Chapter hath been inscribed. [And thou shalt\line set upon it] a figure of the deceased made of palm wood, seven fingers\line in height. And thou shalt perform on it the ceremony of "Opening the\line Mouth." Then thou shalt make a cavity in the north wall, and having\line [placed the brick and the figure inside it], and turned the face of\line the figure towards the south, thou shalt wall up the cavity. [It shall\line repulse the enemies of the Osiris Nu], who would assemble at the south\line wall.\line\line And behold, these things shall be done by a man who is washed clean,\line and is ceremonially pure, and who hath eaten neither meat nor fish,\line and who hath not [recently] had intercourse with women. And behold,\line thou shalt make offerings of cakes and ale to these gods, and shalt\line burn incense on their fires. Every Spirit-soul for whom these things\line shall be done shall become like a holy god in Khert-Neter, and he\line shall not be turned back at any gate in Amentet, and he shall be in\line the following of Osiris, whithersoever he goeth, regularly and\line continually.\par
\pard\par
}
 